Organizational Change and Culture in Universities as
Non-profit Organizations
Bülent Kanol
Executive Director
The Management Centre

Chaffee and Tierney (1988)1 argued
" Institutions are certainly influenced by powerful external factors,
such as demographics, economic, and political conditions, yet
they are also shaped by strong forces that emanate from within.
Thi s i nt erna l dy n amic h as its roo ts i n th e hist o ry of the
organization and derives its force from the values, traditions,
processes, and goals held by those most intimately involved in the
organization's workings. The most fundamental construct of an
organization, as of a society is its culture. An organization's culture
is reflected in what is done, how it is done, and who is involved in
doing it. It concerns decisions, actions, and communication both
on an instrumental and symbolic level."

The role of culture for organizational development and performance has been stressed
and analysed by various writers on the subject. What we are inquisitive about, for the
purpose of this thesis, however is the role of culture in relation to changes in the higher
education sector and its effect on management style. In our literature review culture
has emerged as one of the most important factors that internally govern change in
universities.
William Taylor 2 wrote " Organizations differ according to their history, purpose and
structure, in the scope of their moral and cultural integration, and to the extent to which
commitment to values and exemplary behaviour is required or enforced."
Taylor further argues that "universities are engaged in sacred rather than utilitarian
activities, yet the diversity of these activities does not make for high levels of moral
integration. This can give rise to particular difficulties when they attempt to act
corporately in the face of external threat."
Culture can be defined as an interpretation of internalized knowledge and experience
by a way of social behaviour. This means that any knowledge or experience which is
internalized by an individual will be reflected in his or her beha viour. This same
phenomenon can be expected to be observed in organizations where a collection of
individual cultures are combining to make up an organizational culture. However the
more diversified individual cultures are the more complex the organizational culture
becomes. Furthermore the more diversified the activities, experiences fields of learning
and learning processes are the more difficult it will be to translate the culture of
organization into meaningful plan of actions and practices.
Universities are places where there is a continuous process of learning in various
differing fields and disciplines. At the same time employees of these institutions are
overwhelmingly academic who are semi-professional in nature as well as being

academic and in some circumstances managerial, administrative and even executive.
Emphasis on new managerialism in universities since 1980s also resulted in some
universities having more employees who are exclusively executive, managerial and
administrative with a number of workers as 'supporting/administrative staff '
experiencing some confusion as to where their support should go. To complete the
picture we have the student body. They also have influence in shaping a university's
culture and they too come from very diverse backgrounds.
With such a complex composition of academic, administrative, managerial staff and
students it would be rather naive to expect to see a simple pattern of organizational
3
behaviour in universities. Baldridge et al suggested that universities are distinguished
by six characteristics:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Goal ambiguity,
Professional staff
High level of autonomy of sub-units
Part- time decision-makers
Environmental vulnerability and
Undifferentiated functions.

Academics, it is argued, experience a divided loyalty between the discipline at large,
their peers at national and international level, and the local institution. Those with
primary loyalty to the discipline, the scholarly community described as 'cosmopolitans',
and those whose first loyalty is to the institution, 'locals'. The cosmopolitan tendencies
of many staff result in diminished administrative power over them as they receive their
rewards and status in part from the international peer group. As their functions and
responsibilities change academic bureaucrats perceive and can enforce different
priorities.

It is further argued that professionalism is based on expertise, and it is this expertise
that is acknowledged in peer evaluation. It is a matter of adhering to the standards in
the discipline, and therefore peer evaluation is accepted and enforced. Peer evaluation
has a long tradition in universities, though largely confined to research and writing.
High Level Autonomy of Sub-Units is found by Baldridge et al to have resemblance
to Cohen and March's (1974) "organized anarchies", to Clark (1977) describing
universities as "bottom heavy"; and also to Weick (1976) speaking of universities as
"loosely coupled systems". The argument is that academics find it often easier to talk
to colleagues in the discipline elsewhere than to colleagues from other departments in
their own universities. Thus communication across departments may be poor and
individual and departmental goals may be pursued which are not necessarily in
harmony with the institutions.
Universities are also characterized by having Part-time Decision-makers, in its
councils as well as its academic administrators and committees. This makes
universities very different from business organizations where resources and people are
managed through hierarchical controls.
Lockwood (1985) also quoted by Baldridge favours the part time status of the senior
academic management as found in Britain. He claims that the continuing involvement
in academic activities is necessary for 'heads' and 'deans' own careers, helps them to

remain in close contact with the activities and personnel they are helping to administer,
and to retain the confidence of the academic staff.
Environmental Vulnerability means that with most of the funds coming from the
government in most of the countries, universities are very dependent on the autonomy
that governments grant and aware of the power of interference they have and
sometimes exercise.
Finally Undifferentiated Function describes situations in the basic units of the
American universities and the British and Australian universities in general there are
neither a hierarchical of tutor-lecturer-senior lecturer-associate professor and professor
in terms of direction nor are there a clear or consistent differentiation in function.
Lecturers like professors are expected to perform teaching duties and to do research,
to engage in professional activities and to take on administrative tasks. This is closely
connected to the notion of 'community of scholars', of looking at colleagues as peers,
not as superiors or inferiors in terms of position.
In the academic hierarchy there is little direction. There is an acknowledgement that
the senior members have the advantage of more experienc e and accumulated
expertise, but that the younger staff will achieve similarly.
Trice and Beyer in their book titled "The Cultures of Work Organizations" suggest that:

"Cultures are collective phenomena that embody people's
responses to the uncertainties and chaos that are inevitable in
human experience. These responses fall into two major
categories. The first is the substance of a culture - shared,
emotionally charged belief systems that we call ideologies. The
second is cultural forms - observable entities, including actions,
through which members of a culture express, affirm, and
communicate the substance of their culture to one another.
Clearly, people in organizations develop both cultural substance
and cultural forms. Out of these processes cultures grow. Cultures
are a natural outgrowth of social interactions that make up what
we call organizations.
"

4

Substance of a culture stems from mainly ideologies. Since ideologies generate
powerful beliefs these beliefs in turn create strong emotions that generates synergy
among the individuals of an organization. Trice and Beyer quotes Geertz 5 referring to
two major explanations for the origins and role of ideologies in human culture: Interest
theory and strain theory: Interest theory is much emphasized by the Marxian theories
as ideology being a tool for a continuous struggle between social classes to achieve
economic interests through political power. Strain theory on the other hand takes a
broader view of ideology and explains that its general tenets are:

"(1) Social life inevitably produces ambiguities, conflicts, and other strains; and (2) that
people use ideologies to deal with the anxieties arising from those strains. "6
Ideologies according to Geertz lessen strain by fulfilling four functions: catharsis,
morality, solidarity, and advocacy. Geertz argues that
"The cathartic function is accomplished when emotional tension is
lessened through projection of blame and anger o nto symbolic

enemies. The moral function applies when ideologies either deny
chronic strain outright or else legitimize its existence in terms of
higher values. Solidarity is realized when ideologies knit a group
or social class together by creating a sense of community. Finally,
ideologies perform an advocacy function when they articulate
strains, calling attention to them, often polarizing them, and in the
process making it difficult to ignore and neglect them."
One could argue therefore that the stronger the strain and hardship in a particular
society, organization or a group the more is the need for ideology in order to ease or
relieve the effect of the strain. Rationality, Egalitarianism, Performance -oriented
managerial ideologies, Social Darwinism, Industrial betterment, scientific management,
Human relations, Quality of work life and Employee assistance programs are some
ideological elements developed in American work organizations over the years.'
Cultural forms, on the other hand,
"condense and make cultural ideologies concrete. They serve as
sense making mechanisms by which members of a culture can
either consciously or unconsciously drive meaning from their
situations. Collective sense making involves many social
processes, including communication, influence, leadership, habit
formation, conditioning, reciprocity, negotiation, imitation, role
modelling, and exploratory action. " 5
Therefore in order to understand any form of culture there is a need first to
comprehend and recognize the ideologies that go with those cultural forms.

Organizational Sub-cultures and Occupational Principle

Trice and Beyer in their book further suggest that:
"An overall culture consists of some number of cultural elements
that are embraced by practically everyone in an organization.
Organizations can have both an overall culture and a multiplicity of
subcultures.
...some sub cultural elements resemble the overall culture in
which they are embedded in many ways, and others d eviate
markedly from it. The more unique the element of a subculture,
the more it encourages members to loosen their commitment to
the overall culture and generate shared rationalizations that allow
them to violate significant aspects of it.
....... The most highly organized, distinctive, and pervasive sources
of subcultures in work organizations are people's occupations. As
such, they provide a good starting point for an examination of
subcultures in organizations.
........ Thus occupational subcultures often compete with specific
organizations' cultures for members' minds and hearts."

Occupational subcultures in other organizations like engineers or researchers in a
large organization can be distinctive and can be influential if the numbers of these staff
are sufficient to build up a strong constituency in the organization that has an overall
culture evolved as a result of several other influences and subcultures. One of the
strongest influences on this overall culture is the influence of the vision and ideology of
the founder leader and the current leader of the organization.
In universities however academics make up the strongest occupational subculture in
the organization and because the nature of service performed is also academic the
influence of this particular subculture is much more superior and dominant than any
other subculture including managerialism.
In free market economies, corporations are there to produce goods and services and in
doing this to be able to survive, to grow and make money for their shareholders and in
turn attract more investment for further survival and growth that will also bring more
jobs better quality of life and as an indirect result contribute to the development of
society. For this to happen it is a widely accepted phenomenon that corporations are to
be managed well. Good management or managerialism therefore has become a strong
ideology dominating the culture of these organizations. Academic researchers or
engineers in such organizations make up their own subcultures; they tend to be
subordinated to the ideology of managerialism.
Universities, on the other hand are for centuries given a much wider in some instances
'sacred' mission compared to private corporations in the sense that their primary aim is
to produce knowledge and equip people with this knowledge. This function of
universities requires a highly intellectual as well as qualified and skilful workforce very
much similar to those medical doctors in hospitals whose job is to treat people who
suffer from illness and sometimes even faced with death.
"Professional values usually emphasize the interests of individual
clients. The code of ethics of physicians says they must put the
welfare of patients above all other concerns; thus, the costs of
treatment are peripheral concerns to the doctor. To the hospital
administrator, costs are a much more central concern. Similarly, to
the basic scientist, contributing to scientific progress is the ultimate
goal; scientific norms thus dictate the full sharing of new findings
and techniques with the rest of the scientific community. But
private firms who employ scientists and have financed their
res e arc h n at urally w a nt to p re se rv e th e s ec re cy of t heir
discoveries and obtain patents for them so they can realize a
financial return."9
It is therefore a very sensitive matter when such institutions are adapting certain
management methods because the "occupational subculture" of those academics and
medical doctors are very powerful and in some cases tend to subordinate or even
assimilate management. It is not unusual to see a very successful medical doctor
assigned to manage a hospital and similarly many higher education institutions tend to
have academics that are successful in their discipline becoming Directors, Vice Chancellors, Presidents or Rectors in Universities with no management training. This
tendency in higher education institutions kept them at a distance from managerialism

for centuries and has administrative functions supporting academics especially at times
when there is no financial hardship and funding requirement of universities was taken
care by the state certainly in the UK, or by large endowment grants in the case of some
private universities in the USA. However the changes in the funding environment and
consequently tighter demand from the central governments are introduced, private
foundation universities as well as some state universities are driven to be more
market as well as industry oriented and therefore to seek to adapt certain
management methods in order to cope with this changing circumstances.

"As their sense of identity as an occupation develops, members
come to believe that, because of their technical knowledge, they
collectively know best how to cope with certain task -related
demands. They also come to see the demands of those
outside the occupation as representing significant sources of
uncertainty for them. In particular, administrative attempts to
control their work create uncertainty because such attempts
often spring from different ideologies and concerns than those
of the occupation. Thus, to reduce their uncertainties and realize
the ideologies they have developed about their work, as
occupations develop "members seek autonomy and control
over their particular and distinctive work" (Freidson 1982, p.54)" 10
It is useful at this stage to demonstrate the table presented by Trice & Beyer,
showing the relation between Management and Occupations:
Table 2-1 A Framework for Considering relations between Management and
Occupations in Organizations'
Control by Administrative Principle
Predominant

Subordinate
(3)
Assimilation
management
occupation

(1) Mutual Tolerance and
Accommodation

Predominant
Control by
Occupational
Principle

Subordinate

Lawyers
and Doctors
corporations
Skilled craft workers

in

of
by

Universities
Social work agencies
Hospitals
Police departments

(2)
Assimilation of
Occupation by management

(3)E g a l i t a r i a n
Relations

Accountants Engineers
Pharmacists
Deskilled occupations

Food cooperatives Alternative
Schools Health Collectives

Cell 2 is explained as "representing situations where management has managed to
dilute the control of occupational subcultures by providing career tracks that lead

Trice & Beyer (1993): Adapted from Sonnenstuhl and Trice 1991.

occupational members into management or by simply reducing the skills required and
thus the distinctiveness of an occupation."
Cell 3 represents the situation where occupational groups generate their own
administrative structures to plan, direct, and control their work processes. In effect, the
organizations involved grow up around the skills of members of that occupation and
the organizations that result are made up almost entirely of members of that
occupation. In such situations, the occupational principle predominates. Within law
firms and accounting firms, members accept technical supervision only if it is carried
out by a senior respected member of the occupation.
Members of each group-occupation and managers-may think they know best how work
should be organized and carried out. Members of an occupation usually feel they need
discretion to use their work-related expertise appropriately; members of management
on the other hand feel they must exercise some measure of control to ensure efficiency
and prevent opportunism. When members of occupations are successful in
establishing such control, management decisions are significantly constrained.
Furthermore, since workers do not need to depend on work organizations for their
training, but instead on outside organizations or groups, they enter employing
organizations as relatively independent agents who have allegiances to occupational
groups outside the organization.
The following are some important passages further quoted from Trice& Beyer about
the relationship and conflict between the Occupational principle or subculture and the
administrative principle or managerialism.

"Despite the assimilation by members of these occupations of their
administrators, differences in the sub cultural values between the
two groups remain sources of conflict. Even in these settings
administrators may feel obliged to enact the administrative
principle. As long as occupational members believe that their
administrative colleagues have the group's interests at heart, they
show goodwill and cooperate with their directives. If, however, an
administrator colleague is perceived as pursuing administrative
interests to the detriment of the group, members will revolt and
seek to replace the administrator (Feldman 1987"). Such
instances are dramatic reaffirmations of the proper order of things.
The welfare of the occupation comes before anything else.
Among the subcultures that occur frequently in organizations
those forming around occupations seem especially prone to
ethnocentrism. The consciousness of kind members develop
makes "us" seem very different from "them".
Members of each group-occupation and managers-may think
they know best how work should be organized and carried out.
Both can have the same goals of achieving good work-related
outcomes, yet differ substantially in the specifics of how they think
work should be done. Members of an occupation usually feel they
need discretion to use their work-related expertise appropriately;
members of management feel they must exercise some measure

of control to 'ensure efficiency and prevent opportunism. Each
sees work-related issues from the framework provided by their
own experiences and ideologies.
……One way to describe the situation is in terms of the distinction
between the occupational principle and the administrative principle
(Freidson 1973, p.19). According to the administrative principle,
management dictates the division of labour in work organizations
by deciding the way that tasks are divided and who will do them,
and then trains and indoctrinates workers to perform according to
those decisions. According to the occupational principle, certain
workers have exclusive rights to perform certain kinds of work, to
control training for the access to doing that work, and to control
the way it is performed and evaluated (Freidson 1973, p.22).
...... The occ upational autonomy of even the traditional
professions could conceivably be reduced by recent developments
in computerization and other technologies."

Effects of External Environment
Internal dynamics coming from the diversified cultural formation of universities is not
the only force that influences how those institutions react to change, but the
environmental culture is also one major force that will have a determining effect on how
these institutions will behave in changing circumstances.
12

G. Hofstede in his studies found that there are four different dimensions by which
different societies in the world can be grouped in terms of their cultural behaviour:
(1) Power distance (2) Uncertainty avoidance (3) Individualism (4) Masculinity
Power distance is a dimension where one can see differences in terms of how people
perceive power sharing in a society. It is argued that in some societies, distinctively
more than others, people with less or no power can readily accept a minority of ruling
elite having a lot of power to determine their life and their future. Whereas in other
societies people can be much more enthusiastic to share power and resist autocracy
and centralization.
Uncertainty avoidance is another dimension where societies are apprehensive about
uncertainty. One would expect to see a lot of anxiety that comes with anything not
clear, new or unknown. People in these societies would like to see everything in black
and white and written down rather than individuals bringing on their own initiatives or
reforms of the existing rules and regulations since this could bring uncertainty.
Individualism as against collectivism is one other dimension where people who
associate themselves with this type of a culture are only interested in self-interest and
immediate family's interests. Although professional work could be quite possible and
suitable in such cultures, somehow, collective work and work for institutional interest
could be considered as rather idealistic and remote concepts.

Masculinity as against feminism is a dimension typical of some cultures in certain
societies where power, things and money are the driving motive behind most
behaviour as against Femininity where the dominant values are 'caring for others and
quality of life'.
This study can lead us to suggest that it is not only the internal culture of universities
that should be studied in order to understand reasons for reactions to change but we
also need to evaluate the setting in which a university operat es and look into the
various elements of culture such as language, religion values and attitudes, tradition
and customs
The above study carried out by Hofstede can be used to demonstrate that countries
can be grouped into societies with similar patterns of cultural dimensions and we can
attempt to explore whether universities in different cultural settings are behaving in
accordance with those dimensions the writer expects them to do.
If different countries are located on a map of Hofstede's cultural dimensions, it is quite
interesting to see that universities in different countries with different dominating
cultural dimensions would react to organizational change in a different kind of way to
others.
This will be demonstrated with regard to the fieldwork we carried out in UK, USA,
Turkey and Northern Cyprus: UK and USA described as Anglo is placed in Hofstede's
map reflecting weak Uncertainty avoidance with more Masculinity as well as high
individualism with moderately small power distance.
Turkey on the other hand as well as Greece in the same cultural category described as
Near Eastern showed strong Uncertainty avoidance with moderately low masculinity
on the one hand and Large power distance and low ind ividualism on the other.
Although Cyprus was not in the analysis list of Hofstede, due to strong historical,
cultural and geographical links with Turkey and Greece we can assume that Northern
Cyprus was also in the same category. The population of Cyprus is mainly Turks and
Greeks.

Understanding the Organizational Culture as Change Agent in Universities
Writing on Culture and Change Chaffee & Tierney 13 discovered that the manner in
which institutions deal with change says much about their organizational culture. They
argue that

" As values and norms come under pressure due to changing
circumstances both internally and in the environment, leaders and
constituents must re-evaluate the purpose and direction of the
institution, and this, in turn influences the organization's structure."
Seven universities in different settings and with different backgrounds are used in their
study to demonstrate how different organizational cultures would react differently to
change. They discovered that "tensions that arise from mismatches in the dimensi ons
of organizational culture suggest the worth of seeking not only a dynamic equilibrium
within the culture but also a coherent identity with r egard to culture, strategy, and

leadership". Their argument leads to a conclusion that with a clear identity and
direction organizations can achieve to move forward and cope with change at the
same time. In their words "a coherent identity can create an upward spiral of
achievement and satisfaction." 14
P.R. Trowler writing in his book titled "Academics Responding to Change: New Higher
Education Frameworks and Academic Cultures" 15 categorically opposes this approach
taken by Chaffee & Tierney as well as the approach taken by David Watson in his book
'Managing Strategy'16 who argues that there is a
"necessity to get beyond `common sense' approaches to
genuinely professional approaches to the trickier areas of
institutional life at the turn of the century: on, for example, human
resources, business planning, estates development, financial
security and external relations. What the sensible chief executive
(or aspirant chief executive) acknowledges, is that she or he will
need help, from other senior professionals, and not just from the
o t h e r s i d e o f an a p a rth e i d -s t yl e di vi si o n o f 'fa c u l ty ' a n d
`administrative' roles."
Watson continues to suggest that academic and especially institutional leadership can
be a source of "pride and joy" and quotes the President of Cornell saying:
"The task of the college president, reduced to its essentials, is to
define and articulate the mission of the institution; develop
meaningful goals; and then recruit the talent, build the consensus,
create the climate, and provide the resources to achieve them. All
else is peripheral."
Trowler on the other hand argues that, there has to be a bottom-up element in all this
and any institutional change to be successful needs the genuine and organized
support from the grass roots members of the organization as well as having this
objective and consensus driven leadership coming from the top.
"Senior management needs to provide leadership, but where
goals are provided they need to be limited, achievable and provide
room for negotiation and accommodation locally. Successful
change is to more likely to come about when there is consensus
above and pressure below, a `change sandwich', rather than
simply flow from above.
"The top-down/bottom-up relationship needs to be one of
dialogue, negotiation and learning from experience. Dialogue is
usually best conducted on the basis of mutual comprehension and
for managers it is particularly important to understand the nature
of contemporary cultural configuration of their institution."
If external cultures affecting the institutions, organization's own culture as well as
occupational and other subcultures developed over the years in academic institutions
are not carefully understood and taken into consideration in any sort of change effort,
the top management will face with a second level management consisting of deans

and heads who are left in a contradictory role not knowing where their loyalty is placed.
This divided loyalty will threaten both the morality as well as the harmony of the
institution and prevent it to demonstrate the dynamism that is much needed for
substantial change. It might even result in a different form of change which might carry
the institution into a form which will not be well received by its stakeholders and its
constituencies.
Kanter, Stein and Jick 17 writing on Organizational Change argues that:
"Unrealistic portrayal of the change process can be dangerous.
Already organizations are inclined to push faster, spend less, and
stop earlier than the process requires. Such inclinations are further
strengthened by an illusion of control that in fact does not exist.
Managers are sometimes misled by consultants or authors who
make change seem like a bounded, defined, discrete process with
guidelines for success. They feel d eceived; instead of a
controllable process, they discover chaos.
In the real world, organizations cannot plot one change to be
rationally and tenaciously pursued. Most corporations must stake
out multiple changes at once, and the change goals themselves
must be continually re-examined, altered, added to, or even
abandoned. Instead of one vision to guide an organization's
overall direction, many companies find they must pursue separate
and sometimes even competing visions, such as quality vision, a
customer vision, and a human resource vision. Instead of one
powerful, centralized change leader, many companies now rely on
teams of collaborating individuals who hammer out the emerging
details of the change process through bargaining, compromise,
and negotiation."

Kanter, Stein and Jick, attempts to answer the question 'How change really comes
about?' and describes a 'Change Funnel' as below:

Figure 2-1- Channel Funnel for Grass Roots Innovations

Crisis or Galvanizing
Event

Grass-Roots Innovatıons

Change Strategists and strategic
Decisions

Individual Implementers and
Change Champions

Action Vehicles for
Change Recipients
Unplanned and unexpected happenings arising from a variety of experiences and
subcultures within an organization sometime also described as 'loose coupling' may
give rise to the Grass-roots Innovations. This foundation in experience, according to
the authors, that can be used to solve new problems as they arise or to replace
existing methods with more productive ones.
The second cluster of forces called Crises or Galvanizing Event causes the
organization to pay attention to the need for change can be external such as the
funding system for universities or can be internal such as an alternative technology or
new demands from higher level officials. If stakeholders indicate that they will not be
satisfied with the same old response to these crises or Galvanizing event than a nontraditional solution may be sought.
Coming to the stage of Change Strategists and Strategic Decisions, grassroots
innovations are used to deal with crises and other events that require change, and
strategies are required in order to channel these grassroots innovations to the right aim
without having them drift away.
Any strategy will need people with power to push forward the ideas agreed upon.
The se can be Individual Implementers or Change Champions.

"Leaders push change in part by repetition, by mentioning the new
idea or the new practice on every possible occasion, in every
speech, at every meeting. What is important about such
communication is certainly not the pat phrases but that they
remind people about the firm commitment of leaders and
implementers to the changes."

Finally the change recipients will need to know what the change means for them and
how it is translated into their activities in the form of Action Vehicles that add
mechanisms that allow the new action possibilities to be realized in practice.

Final Remarks
To conclude therefore, there is a very unique type of leadership needed to steer the
universities in these hard times of change. Uniqueness stems from the unique
character of the universities as organizations which are not similar to private
corporations or public organizations. Uniqueness coming from the services they
provide and uniqueness coming from its diverse, occupational, professional and
sophisticated staff as well as students that make up the major part of the means of
production.
The skills needed to lead such an organization must be complex and sophisticated too.
Peter Drucker uses the example of a symphony orchestra in describing a new model
leaner, flatter organization. In the orchestra
" performers with different skills concentrate on perfecting their
professional competence, while a single conductor coordinates the
overall performance; performers with similar specialities from self
managed work teams, operating without a bureaucratic hierarchy
above them. corporate players to make good music together
they must achieve a balance between concentrating on their own
areas of skill and responsibility and working together with
others."18

1
Chaffee, E.E & Tierney, W. G. (1988) "Collegiate Culture and Leadership Strategies".
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
2

Taylor, W. (1986)"Culture & Leadership in Universities," Leadership & Organizational
Culture, Thomas J. Sergiovanni & John E. Corbally (City: Publisher, 1986) Pages.
3

Baldridge, J.V. Curtis D.V., Ecker, G.P., and Riley, G.L. (1977) "Alternative models of
governance in Higher Education" In "Governing Academic Organizations" Edited by
Baldridge, J. and Deal, T.Berkeley, Cal.: McCutchan
4

Trice, H.M. and Beyer, J.M. (1993). 'The Cultures of Work Organizations'. Prentice
Hall: New Jersey.
5

Geertz, C. (1964) 'Ideology as a cultural system'. Pp 47-76 in Apter,D.E. (ed)
'Ideology and Discontent. New York:Free Press.

6

Ibid

7

Trice & Beyer (1993)
Trice & Beyer (1993)
9
Trice & Beyer (1993)
8

10

Trice & Beyer (1993)

11

Feldman, S.P.(1987). The Crossroads of Interpretation: Administartion in
Professional Organizations. 'Human Organizations, 46(2):95-102. Quoted by Trice &
Beyer
Hofstede, G. (1980) 'Culture's Consequences:lnternational Differences in Work —
Related Values'. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications. Quoted in Rugman, A.M. &
Hodgets, R.M (1995). ' International Business: A Strategic Management
Approach'.McGraw Hill. Int Ed.

12

13

Chaffee & Tierney (1988)

14

Ibid

15

Trowler, P.R. (1998). 'Academics Responding to Change: New Higher Education
Frameworks and Academic Cultures'. SRHE:Buckingham: Open University Press
16

Watson, D. (2000). 'Managing Strategy'. Buckingham: Open University Press

17

Kanter, R.M., Stein, B.A. & Jick, T.D. (1992). ' The Challenge of Organizational
Change: How Companies Experience it and Leaders Guide it'. New York: The Free
Press.
18

Drucker, P. (1988). 'The Coming of the new New Organizaton'. Harvard Business
Review. Vol.66(Jan-Feb).

