E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

ArtIcLE

Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities
in Cyprus: International Peacebuilding
Actors’ Handling of the Recognition
Issue
Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol
Submitted: May 2013
Accepted: September 2013
Published: November 2013

Abstract
In this paper, we argue that the strategy adopted by international peacebuilding actors for dealing with the recognition
issue in Cyprus has created signiicant problems for implementing efective bottom-up peacebuilding activities. Rather than
encouraging cooperation between the two communities, the ‘do no harm’ approach applied has strengthened the position
of the ethno-nationalists who try to prevent cooperation beyond the Cyprus Green Line. We argue that this approach
shows how international actors can be limited in comprehending and dealing with local problems, particularly when their
oicial position is aligned with the oicial position of one side involved in the conlict. International peacebuilding actors
can be much more efective if they thoroughly understand the root causes of conlicts and ensure they take a neutral stand
before engaging in peacebuilding work in post-conlict regions.

Keywords
bi-communal activities, civil society organizations, Cyprus conlict, international peacebuilding actors, peacebuilding

IntroductIon
Compared to the majority of studies related to peacemaking and peacekeeping, peacebuilding literature is mainly
occupied with bottom-up rather than top-down conflict
resolution strategies. Tracing the roots of this research
shows how Galtung (1969) made a plea for concentrating on positive peace related not just to the absence of
violence but also to the integration of human society. Davidson and Monteville (1981-1982) later concentrated on
track II diplomacy, which includes interactions for conflict
resolution between actors from the wider society; Boutros
Boutros-Ghali’s (1992) aim was to change structures in
post-conflict zones, and Lederach’s (1997) endeavour
was to integrate the society as a whole into peacebuilding

JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

activities in order to transform conflicts in post-conflict
societies.
Along with subsequent studies following the same line
of reasoning, they are primarily occupied with culturally
sensitive, everyday, bottom-up peacebuilding (Oda, 2007;
Mac Ginty, 2008; Rubinstein, 1989; Roberts, 2011; Dufey,
2000; Mac Ginty and Richmond, 2013), considering civil
society organizations as indispensable actors (see Marchetti and Tocci, 2009; Barnes, 2009; Pafenholz and Spurk,
2010).
hese publications urge us to stop trying to introduce ‘Westernized peace’ or what the authors name ‘liberal peacebuilding’, arguing that we should instead create
peacebuilding strategies by taking into account the cultural
perspectives and the immediate needs of the societies in

ISSN 2013-8857

39

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

conlict zones. he authors try to distance themselves from
rational-choice approaches as they believe that societies
are constructed in diferent ways in diferent places. Hence,
it is very diicult to formulate universally applicable hypotheses. he predominant approach in peacebuilding literature is case-oriented, without generalising, rather than
variable-oriented research (Ragin, 1997). his does not
mean that the indings will not lead to general conclusions,
but that the researchers are mainly interested in the internal validity of their research in each case. Case-oriented
research aims to describe, explore and explain phenomena
that may be solely of interest to the case under study, with
inference as only a secondary issue. As in most experimental research, the general impact of variables can be better
understood through meta-analyses and literature reviews.
However, doubts remain whether generalizations are possible at all, as speciic variables may not be relevant in different cases, or may have other efects.
Despite the advantage of in-depth analysis, peacebuilding scholars doing locally sensitive in-depth research
cannot advance our knowledge much further than the
suggestion that peoples’ perspectives and needs should be
taken into consideration during peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes. his simple argument creates doubts
about the constructiveness of the results, when the conclusions are restricted to a simple and clear argument that is
more of an assumption than a inding.1 We argue that caseoriented scholars should now start to explore how specific, locally sensitive issues may reduce the efectiveness of
peacebuilding activities. Although descriptive studies are
efective in pointing out the need to take the ‘local individual’ seriously, we have reached a point where we should
concentrate on determining which external factors can explain why the eforts of international peacebuilding actors
may not be congruent with local needs. Only then can we
understand exactly what diminishes the efectiveness of
peacebuilding activities promoted by these international
actors. his would enable us to move from simply criticizing liberal peacebuilding to suggesting how we can improve peacebuilding in general.
Autesserre (2011) argued that anthropological and
constructivist research in peacebuilding neglected three
research topics that are imperative to peacebuilding.
Firstly, while bottom-up studies look at the interactions
between various cultures and military peacekeepers, they
fail to study how culture interacts with track II actors. Secondly, diferent types of activities, such as peacemaking,
peacekeeping or peacebuilding, and local and external actors are studied separately and we lack an understanding
of the interactions between them. Finally, our knowledge
on the similarities between peace-builder strategies that
use indigenous approaches to peacebuilding is lacking.

Along the lines of Autesserre’s (2011) second point, this
paper looks into the interaction between local and external actors. he research method and the question examined follow that of Denksus (2012) who advocated the use
of in-depth analysis that takes into account the everyday
challenges of peacebuilding organizations.
Among Turkish Cypriots, public opinion is divided
with a majority preferring independence and seeing a federation only as a secondary option (Cyprus 2015, 2010). On
the other hand, the Greek Cypriots who previously dominated political power try to prevent the recognition of the
breakaway Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Greek
Cypriots prefer to maintain their territorial sovereignty
and dominate political power in a unitary state (Cyprus
2015, 2010). Delicate issues such as property ownership
(Gürel and Özersay, 2006; Loizides and Antoniades, 2009)
keep the tension between groups alive. Amid the clear conlict between these two communities, civil society actors
from both sides are engaged in peacebuilding activities.
Our endeavour here is to understand how the international
peacebuilding actors’ handling of the recognition issue has
afected the success both sides are achieving. We argue that
the ‘do no harm approach’ adopted by these external actors
in order to prevent any political risk for themselves has created a major problem for the civil society actors that try to
consolidate peace in Cyprus. Following is a formulation of
the argument, substantiated by a brief case study, and some
conclusions.

IntErnAtIonAL Actors’
HAndLIng of tHE
rEcognItIon IssuE As An
obstAcLE for PEAcEbuILdIng
There is extensive literature on the Cyprus conflict, however most research concentrates on Track I diplomacy (Yesilada and Sozen, 2002; Kyriacou, 2000; Eralp and Beriker,
2005; Schiff, 2008; Sözen and Özersay, 2007; Loizides and
Keskiner, 2004; Souter, 1989; Bahceli, 2000). Recent publications argue that negotiations have failed or they should
not have been the focal point for resolving conflict in the
first place (Kanol, 2010; Turk, 2006, 2007, 2009). The writers argue that contact between individuals can reduce
prejudice and create a feeling of “we”, which is the way
forward if a solution is to be found to the Cyprus problem (Turk, 2006, 2007, 2009; Trimikliniotis, 2007; Lönnqvist, 2008; Broome, 2004; Kanol, 2010; Anastasiou, 2002;
Loizos, 2007; Hadjipavlou, 2004, 2007; Ladisch, 2007).
Kanol (2010) argues that civil society holds the key to

1 See Paris (2010) for an extensive critique of the deiciencies of the literature that criticizes liberal peacebuilding.

JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

ISSN 2013-8857

40

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

transforming negative attitudes towards the other community into positive attitudes, creating a “we” feeling. The
full history of peacebuilding activities to date was covered
by Hadjipavlou and Kanol (2008). Most activities took the
form of problem-solving workshops (see Kelman, 1972 for
a definition). These Track II workshops were complemented by Track III activities such as young people going to
bi-communal camps or protest meetings. Recently, some
organizations have also concentrated on peace advocacy
in the form of bi-communal demonstrations and inside
lobbying, which is one-on-one communication with the
policy-makers.
Recent research on civil society and peacebuilding in
Cyprus has found that the sensitivity of the recognition
issue has been a signiicant obstacle to implementing effective peacebuilding activities. One research project implemented by the Cyprus Centre for the European and
International Afairs states clearly: “by far the most important (and obvious) issue that hinders cooperation or
even generates antagonistic behaviour is that of recognition” (Cyprus Centre for the European and International
Afairs, 2011, p. 10). One of the indings from roundtable
discussions with civil society members is that cooperation
with the Turkish Cypriots is hindered in the Greek Cypriot
community who fear that any collaboration may somehow
lead to the recognition of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) (Cyprus Centre for the European and
International Afairs, 2011). he pressure on Greek Cypriot civil society usually comes in the form of ‘naming and
shaming’, accusing those who cooperate in facilitating recognition of the breakaway region. he social pressure within the Greek Cypriot civil society is very strong: no one
wants to be the proverbial ‘black sheep’, so people shy away
from actively collaborating and working with the other
community. his problem is exacerbated by the actions of
certain groups in the Turkish Cypriot community (Cyprus
Centre for the European and International Afairs, 2011).
Donor funding for peacebuilding was found to be a
double-edged sword (Pafenholz et al., 2010): while most
peacebuilding activities would not have been possible without it, donor funding also contributed to the professionalization of peace work. his meant most social movements were
transformed into non-governmental organisations, voluntary work came decreased, the social roots of the movements
weakened and peacebuilding initiatives turned from grassroots cooperation into eforts for fundraising. he authors
argue that the NGOs that managed to secure funding are led
by an urban, educated middle-class which causes problems
of social capital, ownership and legitimacy (Pafenholz et al.,
2010). Unlike these general points, the recognition issue is
case-speciic. he focus here is on this issue, speciically on
how the international actors handled it and how this had an
impact on peacebuilding in Cyprus.
he Republic of Cyprus was founded as a power-sharing state between Greek and Turkish Cypriots as a result
JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

of the London-Zurich (1959) agreements which included
Greece and Turkey as guarantors of the sovereignty, and the
constitution of the Republic of Cyprus based on kinship.
As the former colonial power in Cyprus, Great Britain acknowledged independence and it became a third guarantor
power. Consociationalists argue that rigid proportionality,
grand coalitions, cultural autonomy and minority veto ensure peace, democracy and stability in deeply divided societies (Lijphart 1969, 2004). he Republic of Cyprus satisied
all of these conditions (Yakinthou, 2009). he London-Zurich agreements, however, did not satisfy the Greek Cypriot
community, 78.20% of the population at the time. A majority within the Greek Cypriot community was either in
favour of uniication with the ‘motherland’ or a unitary
state. he Greek Cypriot elite were of the opinion that the
corporate consociationalist system of the Republic of Cyprus gave too much power to the Turkish Cypriot community, which constituted only 18.13% of the population
at that time. Lack of support for the power-sharing government soon created problems. he Republic of Cyprus has
functioned without the efective participation of Turkish
Cypriots since 1964. In 1974, ater a coup led by the Greek
military junta, Turkey responded and occupied about 37%
of the island.
Agreements between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot political elites failed to establish a viable common
state and in 1983, Turkish Cypriots, supported by Turkey, proclaimed the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
as an independent state. To this day, no country except
Turkey recognizes the breakaway region as an independent country. he Republic of Cyprus claims that Turkey
is an occupying force and that TRNC is a puppet state of
Turkey, demanding that Turkish soldiers leave the island.
he majority of Greek Cypriots believe that the problem
is the 35,000 soldiers still deployed in Cyprus, their inability to claim their properties occupied by Turkey and
the illegal low of Turkish immigrants to Cyprus. Turkish Cypriots on the other hand argue that the ‘doctrine
of necessity’ implemented by the Republic of Cyprus has
caused an ‘invasion’ of Greek Cypriots, leading to a unilateral transformation from a bi-communal to a monocommunal state. he majority of Turkish Cypriots believe that
the Turkish soldiers ensure their security. While Turkish
Cypriots are in favour of an independent state, federation is
an acceptable second best solution. Greek Cypriots on the
other hand prefer a unitary state. However, they claim they
rejected the 2002 United Nations plan for settlement of the
problem not because it proposed a federal state but because
it was unfavourable towards the Greek Cypriot community.
On 11 November 2002, the United Nations launched
the Annan Plan. A comprehensive proposal to settle the
Cyprus problem, as a continuation of the top-level negotiations that had begun in late 1999 (Anastasiou, 2008), it
foresaw a bi-zonal federation of the communities. Ater
several revisions, the ith drat was put to a referendum on

ISSN 2013-8857

41

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

24 April 2004, with 65% of the Turkish Cypriot community supporting the plan and 76% of Greek Cypriots rejecting it. As approval depended on a simple majority of both
sides, the plan was rejected. Some analysts suggest that the
peace process was completely curtailed by the rejection
of the Annan Plan by the Greek Cypriots and the ensuing
stalemate in the negotiations between the let-wing leaders
Mehmet Ali Talat and Demetris Christoias. But this idea
may be erroneous due to the misconception that the peace
process was a way of reaching institutional agreement on a
one-state or a two-state solution. In reality, since the Turkish Cypriot decision to allow cross-border visits, during
the Annan Plan process, varying degrees of relationships
have been created between the communities. Although a
substantial number of people still do not cross the checkpoints, and therefore are not exposed to contact with the
other community, there is a growing number of people
who – willingly or unwillingly – have had contact since
the opening of the borders in 2003. Bi-communal activities, some funded by international organizations, have also
increased as a result of the relaxation of border controls
and the more positive environment. Nevertheless, there
is no doubt that there is still a rigid psychological divide
between the two communities and that and any positive
efects of contact will only be seen over time.
In our opinion, when international actors – in this case,
the UN, the EU and the USA – intervene in a reconciliation process without treating the two conlicting parties
equally, they block opportunities for implementing peacebuilding activities. hey are bound by a political stance
which dictates they recognise just one side of the conlict.
Since the Republic of Cyprus is ‘legal’ and the Turkish Republic of Cyprus is ‘illegal’, the UN oicials in Cyprus are
accredited by the Republic of Cyprus which is represented
solely by the Greek Cypriots, who are only one side of the
conlict. UN oicials working to facilitate and provide conlict resolution services through the UN Good Oices mission are under constant pressure from the Greek Cypriot
authorities to not get involved in any activity which might
imply recognition of the Turkish Cypriot authorities or institutions. So, while the UN acknowledges the equality of
the two sides, recognition is only extended to the Greek
Cypriot government of the Republic of Cyprus his dilemma puts the UN in an awkward situation as a neutral actor
supporting the peace building activities, whether through
its Good Oices to facilitate the inter-communal talks or
through the UNDP oices which provide funding for the
peacebuilding projects operating at various levels and sectors on the island.
Organizations like the UN and the EU are bureaucratic institutions and the oicials managing or overseeing peace building projects are oten career-conscious and
risk-averse, so reluctant to push the limits of their operations. his caution is usually disguised by certain not welldeined practises such as ‘do no harm’, which is conveniJOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

ently translated by oicials as maintaining the current state
of afairs. his then becomes a problem in itself, since the
aim of peacebuilding is to transform a situation of conlict into one of reconciliation. In the case of Cyprus, there
have been some exceptional occasions where UN and EU
oicials managed to ind ‘creative’ ways to surpass the diiculties imposed on them not only by the Greek Cypriot authorities but also by their own political/legal frameworks.
However, they had limited impact and were dependent on
the competencies of the individuals in these positions and
their in-depth understanding of the local context. In most
cases, risk-avert oicials adopt the ‘do no harm’ approach
which simply means not granting permission for any bicommunal activity that could be interpreted by the Republic of Cyprus as granting legitimacy to the TRNC.

EngAgE II: ActIvE dIALoguE
nEtworks
Findings from a case study demonstrate how our argument fits reality. Process tracing was used to determine if
and how X leads to Y. We traced the process from X – the
international peacebuilding actors’ handling of the recognition issue – to Y – the reduction in effectiveness of the
peacebuilding activity that was exposed to X. By effectiveness, we mean being able to realize the goals of these projects concerning building trust and promoting sustainable
peace. We looked at the sequence: “(1) a specific event or
process took place, (2) a different event or process occurred
after the initial event or process, and (3) the former was a
cause of the latter” (Mahoney, 2012, p. 571). From the case
studies that can provide evidence for our hypothesis, we
used documents and interviews with the project managers
of the ENGAGE II project, a recent and important scheme
which was implemented in the Turkish Cypriot community by the Management Centre of the Mediterranean, based
there, and in the Greek Cypriot community by the NGOSupport Centre.
In 2012, the ENGAGE II project implemented the
Active Dialogue Networks (ADNs) approach to conlict
resolution in Cyprus. he main aim was to empower local
authorities and local civil society organizations to become
more engaged in the peace process and build conidence
between the two sides. he ADN meetings were strategically designed to create an inclusive environment for different sectors, covering business representatives, academicians, rural groups and local authorities. One of the main
strengths of the meetings in rural areas has been the close
collaboration with the local authorities in creating strategic
partnerships for implementation of the project. At these
meetings, the decision on the main project was voted on by
217 people from the Turkish Cypriot Community and 162
from the Greek Cypriot Community, from six sectors of so-

ISSN 2013-8857

42

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

ciety (civil, academia, local authorities, the private and the
public sector, and the media). hey were from the towns
of Derynia, Pafos, Limassol, Larnaca, Yenibogazici/Ayios
Epiktitos, Catalkoy/Ayios Epiktitos, Guzelyurt/Morphou
and Dikmen/Dikomo. Out of 49 options, a conidencebuilding project covering the whole island was chosen as
the main peacebuilding priority with 16% of the votes.
he project was to translate all oicial documents and
signs on government buildings, and all road signs into
Greek, Turkish and English in speciic regions on the island.
Famagusta in the north of the island and part of Limassol in the south were selected for the pilot project, with
the three names highlighted on the road signs. he project
included historical heritage sites, thereby serving tourists
as well. he expected results were to develop cooperation
between local authorities, civil society and other sectors,
engaging them in the peace process, promoting trust and
conidence between the two sides, improving services for
citizens and visitors and contributing to a more positive climate for high-level talks between the leaders of both sides.
We should emphasize here that there was far more legitimacy to this than the usual projects implemented through
key stakeholder Track II meetings. It was a participatory
and inclusive process that gained the support of the local
authorities as well as various participants from civil society organizations. It is also noteworthy that most of these
organizations were not bi-communal, meaning that they
were not the usual ‘suspects’.2 herefore, the project satisied
the conditions for moving from track II towards the much
needed track III diplomacy in Cyprus (Turk, 2006).
However, the international donors opposed the project when the actions were to be realized. According to the
people interviewed, the international actors argued – as
they always do – that the political risks had to be weighed
up before accepting and facilitating the implementation of
projects, and blocked this one because the dual names on
signs would not be recognized as legitimate by the Republic of Cyprus.
“CSOs, academics and local authorities all agreed that
we should do this suggesting that it is a very important
confidence building measure and very important for
revitalizing the peacebuilding efforts…to have them
agree to it was a success in our opinion…funding was
going to be from the small grants programme which
we have tentatively agreed with the international donor and then at a particular stage of the project the
decision was reversed. This is where our blocking and
barriers came from; the actual funders but not the municipalities which we thought would be the barriers. It

was rejected because they said it was going to be too
politically sensitive. The funder was presuming that
changing the road signs and putting Turkish texts on
the road signs as well as the Greek would imply legitimizing “north” and will upset the Greek Cypriot
authorities.”(Canlibalik, 2013).
“I think that our biggest fear in the ENGAGE project has been convincing people. This time we managed to convince them. The barrier in this case was
the funders…you would expect it to be the other way
around. This time locals were ready but the funders
were not ready…The initial argument of the international donor was that ministry of foreign affairs in
both sides would not accept changing the road signs…
for funding, ministry of foreign affairs in the south can
stop funding from international actors… they have to
be consulted at all times…the donor argued that ministry of affairs would stop funding in the case of changing the road signs” (Andriotis, 2013).
Here we see that the ‘do no harm’ approach of the international actors was an obstacle for the reconciliation efforts of local peacebuilding organizations, even before the
Republic of Cyprus authorities made an attempt to block
the project. he fear the international actors have of disturbing the balance has made them an obstacle towards
peacebuilding on the island. Furthermore, it is arguable
whether the translation of road signs would have had anything to do with the recognition of the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus. he question arises as to whether the ‘do
no harm’ approach has actually harmed the peacebuilding
process.

concLusIon
Over time, the value of the bottom-up approach to peacebuilding is being increasingly taken into account. However, peacebuilding literature has been limited to describing
phenomena and stating the obvious fact that culture should
be taken into account. It should be recognized that it is
more useful to concentrate on focused hypotheses as to
why and how the activities of international peacebuilding
actors were so limited rather than simply suggesting that
indigenous peacebuilding is superior to liberal peacebuilding. Here we have formulated a hypothesis on how the
strategy for dealing with the recognition issue has created
problems for the effectiveness of bottom-up peacebuilding in Cyprus. Evidence for our hypothesis is based on an
important and recent case. Rather than encouraging coop-

2 ‘Usual suspects’ is a name given to the small elite group engaged in bi-communal peacebuilding projects.

JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

ISSN 2013-8857

43

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

eration between the two communities by trying to convince the local authorities of its benefits, the international
actors applied a ‘do no harm’ approach that strengthened
the position of the ethno-nationalists who try to prevent
cooperation across the Green Line. We argue that this
approach shows how international peacebuilding actors
can be limited in comprehending and acting on ‘local’
problems. They might improve their effectiveness if they
thoroughly understood the root causes of conflicts before
engaging in peacebuilding work, and took a more neutral
and progressive stand. It is doubtful that internationally
funded projects, if they are detached from the real issues in
the field and have unbalanced interactions with the sides in
conflict, can contribute much to the consolidation of peace
in any post-conflict country.

At the time of writing, the leaders of the Greek and
Turkish Cypriot communities are restarting secret Track I
negotiations. We have commented that this strategy, backed
by the UN, is not viable since mistrust between the communities is still widespread. At the same time, Track II and
Track III level diplomacy is still being conducted. Funding
by international donors has eliminated some practical obstacles and led to professionalization of peacebuilding activities. However, the brief case study presented here shows
that their approach may limit the possibility of any genuine
cooperation between the communities, curbing the positive
efects of peacebuilding work. Our opinion is that international peacebuilding actors should rethink their approach
with regards to bi-communal activities if they want them to
have a real efect on peacebuilding in Cyprus.

Bibliography
ANASTASIOU, HARRY (2002). “Communication across
conlict lines: he case of ethnically divided Cyprus”.
Journal of Peace Research. Vol. 39, iss. 5, pp. 581-596.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022343302039005005
ANASTASIOU, HARRY (2008). he Broken Olive Branch:
Nationalism, Ethnic Conlict and the Quest for Peace in
Cyprus – Volume II: Nationalization versus Europeanization. New York: Syracuse University Press.
ANDRIOTIS, GIORGOS (2013). Interview by the authors. Nicosia, Cyprus.
AUTESSERRE, SÉVERINE (2011). “Constructing peace:
Collective understandings of peace, peacemaking,
peacekeeping, and peacebuilding”. Critique International. Vol. 51, iss. 2, pp. 1-9.
BAHCELI, TOZUN (2000). “Searching for a Cyprus settlement: considering options for creating a federation,
a confederation, or two independent states”. Publius:
he Journal of Federalism. Vol. 30, iss. 1, pp. 203-216.
BARNES, CATHERINE (2009). “Civil society and peacebuilding: Mapping functions in working for peace”. he
International Spectator. Vol. 44, iss. 1, pp. 131-147.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03932720802693036
BROOME, BENJAMIN J. (2004). “Reaching across the
dividing line: Building a collective vision for peace
in Cyprus”. Journal of Peace Research. Vol. 41, iss. 2,
pp. 191-209.
CANLIBALIK, JALE (2013). Interview by the authors.
Nicosia Cyprus.
JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

CYPRUS 2015 (2010). Investigating the Future: An Indepth Study of Public-Opinion in Cyprus. Nicosia.
CYPRUS CENTRE FOR EUROPEAN AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (2011). Enhancing Civil Society’s
Role in Conlict Prevention and Peace-building in Cyprus. Nicosia: University of Nicosia.
DAVIDSON, WILLIAM D.; MONTVILLE, JOSEPH V.
(1981-1982). “Foreign policy according to Freud”. Foreign Policy. Iss. 45, pp. 145-157.
DENKSUS, TOBIAS (2012). “Challenging the international peacebuilding evaluation discourse with qualitative methodologies”. Evaluation and Program Planning. Vol. 35, iss. 1, pp. 148-153.
DUFFEY, TAMARA (2000). “Cultural issues in contemporary peacekeeping”. International Peacekeeping.
Vol. 7, iss. 1, pp. 142-168.
ERALP, DOGA U.; BERIKER, NIMET (2005). “Assessing
the conlict resolution potential of the EU: he Cyprus
conlict and accession negotiations”. Security Dialogue.
Vol. 36, iss. 2, pp. 175-192.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0967010605054647
GALTUNG, JOHAN (1969). “Violence, peace, and peace
research”. Journal of Peace Research. Vol. 6, iss. 3,
pp. 167-191.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/002234336900600301
GHALI, BOUTROS B. (1992). An agenda for peace. New
York: United Nations.

ISSN 2013-8857

44

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

GÜREL, AYLAŞ; ÖZERSAY, KUDRET (2006). “Cyprus
and the politics of property”. Mediterranean Politics.
Vol. 11, iss. 3, pp. 349-369.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13629390600913957

LOIZIDES, NEOPHYTOS G.; ANTONIADES MARCOS A. (2009). “Negotiating the right of return”. Journal of Peace Research. Vol. 46, iss. 5, pp. 611-622.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022343309339245

HADJIPAVLOU, MARIA (2004). “he contribution of
bicommunal contacts in building a civil society in Cyprus”. In: A. H. EAGLY; R. M. BARON; V. L. HAMILTON (eds.). he Social Psychology of Group Identity
and Social Conlict, heory, Application and Practice.
Washington, D.C. and London: American Psychological Association. Pp. 193-213.

LOIZIDES, NEOPHYTOS; KESKINER, ESER (2004).
“he atermath of the Annan Plan referendums: Crossvoting moderation for Cyprus”. Southeast European
Politics. Vol. 5, iss. 2-3, pp. 158-171.

HADJIPAVLOU, MARIA (2007). “he Cyprus conlict:
Root causes and implications for peacebuilding”. Journal of Peace Research. Vol. 44, iss. 3, pp. 349-365.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022343307076640
HADJIPAVLOU, MARIA; KANOL, BÜLENT (2008).
Cumulative impact case study:he impacts of peacebuilding work on the Cyprus conlict. CDA Collaborative Learning Projects.
KANOL, DIRENÇ (2010). “Civil society’s role in peacebuilding: Relevance of the Cypriot case”. Journal on
Ethnopolitics and Minority Issues in Europe. Vol. 9,
iss. 1, pp. 26-45.
KELMAN, HERBERT C. (1972). “The problem-solving workshop in conflict resolution”. In: RICHARD
L. MERRITT (ed.) Communication in International Politics. Illionis: University of Illionis Press.
Pp. 168-204.
KYRIACOU, ANDREAS P. (2000). “A ‘just and lasting
solution’ to the Cyprus problem: in search of institutional viability”. Mediterranean Politics. Vol. 5, iss. 3,
pp. 54-75.
LADISCH, VIRGINIE (2007). “he challenge of peacebuilding: Cypriot views on reconciliation”. he Cyprus
Review. Vol. 19, iss. 1, pp. 91-107.
LEDERACH, JOHN PAUL (1997). Building peace: Sustainable reconciliation in divided societies. Washington,
DC: United States Institute of Peace Press.
LIJPHART, AREND (1969). “Consociational democracy”.
World Politics. Vol. 21, iss. 2, pp. 207-225.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2009820
LIJPHART, AREND (2004). “Constitutional design for
divided societies”. Journal of Democracy. Vol. 15, iss. 2,
pp. 96-109.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/jod.2004.0029
JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

LOIZOS, PETER (2007). “Bicommunal initiatives and
their contribution to improved relations between their
Turkish and Greek Cypriots”. South European Society
and Politics. Vol.11, iss. 1, pp. 179-194.
LÖNNQVIST, LINDA (2008). Civil society in reconciliation: Beyond the ‘Cyprus problem’. INTRAC Policy
Brieing Paper 21.
MAC GINTY, ROGER (2008). “Indigenous peace-making versus the liberal peace”. Cooperation and Conlict.
Vol. 43, iss. 2, pp. 139-163.
MAC GINTY, ROGER; RICHMOND, OLIVER P. (2013).
“he local turn in peace building: A critical agenda for
peace”. hird World Quarterly. Vol. 34, iss. 5, pp. 763-783.
MAHONEY, JAMES (2012). “he logic of process tracing
tests in the social sciences”. Sociological Methods & Research. Vol. 41, iss. 4, pp. 570-597.
MARCHETTI, RAFFAELE; TOCCI, NATHALIE (2009).
“Conlict society: Understanding the role of civil society in conlict”. Global Change, Peace & Security. Vol. 21,
iss. 2, pp. 201-217.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14781150902872091
ODA, HIROSHI (2007). “Peacebuilding from below: heoretical and methodological considerations toward an
anthropological study on peace”. Journal of the Graduate School of Letters. Vol. 2, pp. 1-16.
PAFFFENHOLZ, THANIA; SPURK, CHRISTOPHER
(2010). “A comprehensive analytical framework”. In:
THANIA PAFFENHOLZ (ed.). Civil Society and Peacebuilding: A Critical Assessment. Boulder: Lynne Rienner. Pp. 65-76.
PAFFENHOLZ, THANIA; SPURK, CHRISTOPHER;
BELLONI, ROBERT; KURTENBACH, SABINE; ORJUELA, CAMILLA (2010). “Enabling and disenabling
factors for civil society and peacebuilding’. In: THANIA PAFFENHOLZ (ed.) Civil Society and Peacebuilding: A Critical Assessment. Boulder: Lynne Rienner.
Pp. 405-424

ISSN 2013-8857

45

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

PARIS, ROLAND (2010). “Saving liberal peacebuilding”.
Review of International Studies. Vol. 36, iss. 2, pp. 337365.
RAGIN, CHARLES (1997). “Turning the Tables: How CaseOriented Research Challenges Variable-Oriented Research”. Comparative Social Research. Vol. 16, pp. 27-42.

TURK MARCO, A. (2006). “Cyprus reuniication is long
overdue: the time is right for Track III diplomacy as the
best approach for successful negotiation of this ethnic
conlict”. Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review. Vol. 28, iss. 2, pp. 205-255.

ROBERTS, DAVID (2011). “Post-conlict peacebuilding,
liberal irrelevance and the locus of legitimacy”. International Peacekeeping. Vol. 18, iss. 4, pp. 410-424.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13533312.2011.588388

TURK, MARCO A. (2007). “Rethinking the Cyprus
problem: Are frame-breaking changes still possible
through application of intractable conlict intervention approaches to this hurting stalemate?”. Loyola of
Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review.
Vol. 29, iss. 3, pp. 463-501.

RUBINSTEIN, ROBERT, A. (1989). “Culture, international afairs, and multilateral peacekeeping: Confusing process and pattern”. Cultural Dynamics. Vol. 2,
iss. 1, pp. 41-61.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/092137408900200104

TURK, MARCO A. (2009). “Negotiation culture of
lengthy peace processes: Cyprus as an example of spoiling that prevents a inal solution”. Loyola of Los Angeles
International and Comparative Law Review. Vol. 31, iss.
3, pp. 327-362.

SOUTER, DAVID (1989). “he Cyprus conundrum: he
challenge of the intercommunal talks”. hird World
Quarterly. Vol. 11, iss. 2, pp. 76-91.

YAKINTHOU, CHRISTALLA (2009). Political settlements
in divided societies: Consociationalism and Cyprus. Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/9780230246874

SÖZEN, AHMET; ÖZERSAY, KUDRET (2007). “he
Annan plan: state succession or continuity”. Middle
Eastern Studies. Vol. 43, iss. 1, pp. 125-141.
TRIMIKLINIOTIS, NICOS (2007). “Reconciliation and
social action in Cyprus: Citizens’ inertia and the protracted state of limbo”. he Cyprus Review. Vol. 19, iss.
1, pp. 123-160.

YESILADA, BIROL A.; AHMET SOZEN, AHMET (2002).
“Negotiating a resolution to the Cyprus problem: Is potential European Union membership a blessing or a curse?”.
International Negotiation. Vol. 7, iss. 2, pp. 261-285.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/138234002761384990

Recommended citation
KANOL, Bülent; KANOL, Direnç (2013). “Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities in Cyprus: International
Peacebuilding Actors’ Handling of the Recognition Issue” [online article]. Journal of Conflictology. Vol. 4, Iss. 2,
pp. 39-47. Campus for Peace, UOC. [Consulted: dd/mm/yy].
http://www.uoc.edu/ojs/index.php/journal-of-conflictology/article/view/vol4iss2-kanol-kanol/vol4iss2-kanolkanol-en
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7238/joc.v4i2.1828
ISSN 2013-8857
he texts published in this journal are – unless indicated otherwise – covered by the
Creative Commons Spain Attribution 3.0 licence. You may copy, distribute, transmit and
adapt the work, provided you attribute it (authorship, journal name, publisher) in the
manner speciied by the author(s) or licensor(s). he full text of the licence can be consulted here: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/es/deed.en.

JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

ISSN 2013-8857

46

E-journal promoted by the Campus for Peace, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

http://journal-of-conflictology.uoc.edu

Bülent Kanol and Direnç Kanol Roadblocks to Peacebuilding Activities…

About the authors
Bülent Kanol
bkanol@mcmed.eu
Dr. Bülent Kanol is currently the founding director of the Management Centre of the Mediterranean in Cyprus. He is also a research associate at the Centre for Organization in Development at the University of Manchester. As a prominent figure with 30 years of practical peacebuilding experience in bi-communal activities
in Cyprus, his publications on civil society and peacebuilding in Cyprus include a co-authored monograph
and a book chapter.
Direnç Kanol
direda@yahoo.co.uk
Direnç Kanol is studying for a PhD at the University of Siena. He has published in peer-reviewed journals
such as the Journal of Contemporary European Research, the Journal on Ethnopolitics and Minority Issues in
Europe, The Cyprus Review, Interdisciplinary Political Studies and the NEU Journal of Social Sciences. His
article on civil society and peacebuilding in Cyprus appeared in the Journal on Ethnopolitics and Minority
Issues in Europe.

JOURNAL OF CONFLICTOLOGY, Volume 4, Issue 2 (2013)

ISSN 2013-8857

47

