Sustainable Tourism Development in Northern Cyprus and Prospects for
Convergence

Dr. Bulent Kanol
(PhD in Management)
27 May 2005
Nicosia

CONTENTS
Introduction
Literature Review
- Contemporary developments in tourism
- Sustainable tourism
- Cooperation and Peace building through tourism

Methodology
- Action Research methodology
- Strategic Plan approach
- Case Studies

Research and Findings
-Primary – work carried out with tourism sector 1999-2005
-Secondary- Masterplan studies
Latest statistical and other information

Analysis and Discussion

Conclusions and Recommendations

2
INTRODUCTION
The guiding hypothesis to this paper is that:
Tourism sector can be a leading sector in Northern Cyprus economy and contribute to a
healthy convergence of the two currently separate economies in Cyprus through adopting a
sustainable tourism development based on quality and special interest tourism when there is a
political solution. Furthermore, cooperation in the area of tourism might be a leverage for a
peaceful path to this solution process.
The author envisages that the long lasting low occupancy rates in the North is due to a lack of
strategic approach to tourism as well as the political instability and limitations arising from a
lack of solution to the Cyprus problem. This paper looks at what could be done in the area of
tourism with possible incentives and aid to adopt the right investment strategy, in order to
help the economy of Northern Cyprus. The main aim being to develop the economy in a
sustainable way and prepare the ground for a healthy convergence with the economy of the
South.
The first part of the paper looks at contemporary developments in the area of sustainable
tourism development and cases of cooperation in tourism in conflict areas. The second part
explains the methodology used to reach findings. Third part is the various researches carried
out in the area and findings followed by analysis and discussions. The final part is
Conclusions and Recommendations.
The paper aims to help those policy makers who are seeking ways of developing the economy
of Northern Cyprus and managing a smooth convergence of the two economies currently
existing in Cyprus.

Literature Review
Contemporary Developments
According to World Tourism Organization 1 tourism arrivals which were 564 millions in the
year 1995 will reach 1,602 millions in the year 2020 and the receipts fro tourism activity will
increase from 399 billion US$ in 1995 to 2,000 billion US$ in the year 2020. According to
this same study world’s top outbound countries that will send tourists to other countries will
be Germany, Japan, US, China and UK.
It is forecasted that although Europe will loose its share in tourism intake over the years the
Central-Eastern and Eastern-Mediterranean (Turkey, Cyprus and Israel) countries will
increase their share. The estimated average growth for the East-Med countries are given as
4.6%. It is also recognized that Middle Eastern countries have a huge potential to increase
their share through its natural and cultural resources but “the key to success of tourism in the
Middle East is the political stability of the region.” 2

The so-called “Mega trends” that were foreseen by this study of WTO included
•

Globalisation/localisation

3
• The impact of Electronic technology
• Polarisation of tourist tastes: Comfort based and adventure based
• 3Es concept (Entertainment, excitement and education)
(This is in contrast to 3Ss: Sea, Sand and Sun.) BK
• Sustainable tourism and socio-environmental consciousness.
Cyprus seats in the middle of what one can describe as the cross-road of the growth of
tourism activity with its strategic geographical location that connects Central and Eastern
Europe, Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean (Three regions with high potential of
growth). However Cyprus has easy access and traditional links with only the UK
(increasingly with Russia and Turkey) one of the countries that will send out more and more
tourists. The other big players such as Germany, Japan, US and China do not have a
traditional interest for Cyprus. 3

Sustainable Tourism Development
The WTO has defined sustainable tourism as follows:
“ Sustainable tourism development meets the needs of present tourists and host regions while
protecting and enhancing opportunities for the future. It is envisaged as leading to
management of all resources in such a way that economic, social and aesthetic needs can be
fulfilled while maintaining cultural integrity, essential ecological processes, biological
diversity, and life support systems.” 4
This definition is further elaborated as follows:
•

•

•

•

•

The natural, historical, cultural and other resources for tourism are conserved for
continuous use in the future, while still bringing benefits to the present society.
Tourism development is planned and managed so that it does not generate serious
environmental or socio-cultural problems in the tourism area
The overall environmental quality of the tourism area is maintained and improved
where needed
A high level of tourist satisfaction is maintained so that the tourist destinations will
retain their marketability and popularity.
The benefits of tourism are widely spread throughout the society. 5

Cooperation and Peace building through Tourism
Young-Sun suggests that
“Tourism is strongly dependent on peace and security (Pizam and Mansfeld, 1996). In other
words, tourism is impossible without peace, for instance, remarkably, Vietnam is now a
holiday destination. The need for safety and obtaining a secure environment is one of the
basic conditions to ensure tourism. Tourism flourishes in a climate of peace and prosperity.
Political unrest, war depressions and civil strife discourage tourism (McIntosh et al,1995).
Furthermore, the relationship between tourism and peace has two dimensions according to
Michalic (1996). On the one hand tourism “can be a vital force for peace” (WTO,1980) and
on the other hand, tourism needs peace for its development and prosperity.” (YoungSun,2004) 6

4
Young-Sun further explains how the two political leaders of two Koreas (North and South)
recognised the importance of tourism in building peace when they met in Pyongyang to end
over fifty years of hostilities. One leading example was ‘the use of water-based activity
holidays and cruising that promote the use of the Mt. Kumgang’.
Similar to North Cyprus North Korea is unexplored and ‘the establishment of transboundary
attractions with South Korea is bound to yield benefits for both countries. Some suggested
cooperation areas are:

• -Joint tourism infrastructure
• -Co-operation in human development

-Joint operations for transboundary attractions

“Although the economic data ….. indicate the premature tourism industry of North Korea
compared to South Korea, cooperation between the two countries could be in a form of
complementary, where each country offers its relative advantages. South Korea can diversify
its tourism product due to new regional attractions, while North Korea can benefit from
increasing tourists, new jobs, and exploiting economies of scale.The conglomeration that
would arise from joint tourism management can result in a successful tourism product. Such
joint tourism projects would serve as powerful systems of movement toward reconciliation.
Consequently, peace through tourism is not an isolated process. It is part of a larger social
change that begins with recognition that the fundamental social and political order is
changing. The should be better political relationships between the two Korea for the
development of tourism industry……. Tourism cooperation of the two Korea appears to be a
viable way of opening a path to peace by eroding the seemingly unbreakable wall that has
divided Korea.” (Young- Sun,2004) 7

Primary Research
Action Research by Working Committees with Representatives from the Tourism sector
(1999-2000)
The author led 6 consecutive meetings held with participation of almost all of the stakeholders
of the Tourism sector in North Cyprus making up the “Tourism Advisory Council”. The first
meeting formed 4 working committees: The working committees were formed by way of
consultation with all the stakeholders in this first meeting in accordance with the main areas
that need attention. These were 1) Promotion and Marketing; 2) Transport; 3) Human
Resources and Training; 4) Tourism product and local measures dealing with this product.
The first four took place quarterly during the year 1999 and the last two in the first half of
year 2000.
The working committees determined the problems of the sector relating to their own areas of
concentration.

5
The original problems encountered were listed by a method of action research and
brainstorming in a workshop setting in each working group and these were discussed and
ratified in the Advisory Council by the participation of all concerned.
Problems and strategies of the tourism sector in North Cyprus established by working
committees and ratified by the Advisory Council were as follows:
Tourism Promotion and Marketing:
1. Lack of “image” and professional media coverage
2. The ineffectiveness of the tourism bureaus in other countries
3. No clear strategy on What to market and how to market
Tourist Transport:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

The ownership of CTA (KTHY)
Old Planes in the CTA fleet
Not being able to fly to and from new destinations
Lack of standards in charter incentives
Not being able to use CTA for tourism promotions
Delays in fixing price lists for tour operators
Lack of Interline agreement between the CTO and other airlines
Tourists coming to Istanbul have to wait long hours to take a plane to Ercan

Human Resources and Training:
1. There is a need to reorganise and restructure OTEM (tourism vocational school). The
graduates are not adequate.
2. Those graduates from tourism colleges are moving out of sector
3. The hotels opt for unskilled and cheap labour and do not hire tourism graduates
4. Those tourism students going for summer internships are mistreated.
5. The tourist guide courses do not have standard and adequate curriculum
6. Not enough staff are trained to serve in the area of special interest tourism
7. Taxi and tour drivers are not trained to serve the sector
8. Lack of a Tourism Research and documentation Centre/Library

Tourism Product and Local measures
1. Inadequate legal infrastructure of related organisations in the sector
2. Inadequate municipal services (specially water and garbage collection)
3. Lack of quality and price standards for hotels and restaurants
4. Unplanned construction work destroying the environment
5. Lack of regional and resort based sewage and treatment systems for waste water
6. Noise pollution coming from open-air music from discos and restaurants.
7. Lack of profile for tourist expectations
8. Lack of physical zoning plans in the current masterplan/development plan
9. Lack of inspection over Car rental companies
10. Tourism investments submitting their projects after starting construction
11. Inadequate maintenance, repair and restoration work on antiquities

6
12. Negligence of Guzelyurt/ Lefke region as a tourist destination
13. High and unstable Taxi fares
14. Lack of alternative tourism options

Action Research taken to Regional Level-Karpaz (November 2004)
The author led a seminar/workshop under the title “Achieving sustainable tourism
development in the Karpaz region” in November 2004 with the participation of many
stakeholders of the Karpaz region (see Appendix A for the list of participants). Some extracts
from contributions of the participants are as follows:
Friends of Karpaz - Mrs. Meryem Özbolat, president:
•

•

“There is only one Karpaz” is the slogan

•

Successful establishment of the association realised

•

organic agriculture for tourism in the region

Eco-tourism, historical heritage and restoration, architectural originality,

Cooperation and participation is needed for sustainable development

Turkish Cypriot Guides Assoc. – Ms. Ayşe Gökyiğit, president:
•

•

Environmentally sensitive tourism alternatives is needed

•

Bird Life

•

Belief Tourism (starting from St. Barnabas to Ap.Andreas)

•

Equestrian facilities

•

Domestication of donkeys for tourists

•

Turtles

•

Festivals (Grape, carob, olive etc.)

•

Yatching
Information office about natural life

Dipkarpaz Municipality – Mr. Arif Özbayrak, mayor:
•

•

Changes needed in the new regulation of Karpaz area

•

Language, professional behaviour and service trainings

•

Information and training seminars to local people

•

Agro-tourism, beekeeping, fishing
Festivals

KEMA Assoc. – Mr. Osman Tuğsal, secretary general:
•

•

Enlargement of the new regulation to other areas
New law needed on soil usage

7
•

Aromatic plants should be encouraged in infertile regions

Fishermen Assoc. – Mr. Özay Öykün, president:
•

•

•

Fisheries should be developed
Fisheries shelters should be improved
Changes needed in the new regulation of Karpaz area

Oasis – Mr. Michael de Glanville, owner:
•

Try to act rather than watching – cooperation of local producers with local
businesses improves local economy

Mehmetçik Culture Assoc. – Mr. Halil Hepşen, president :
•

Grapes and its derivatives need good marketing
Black grapes for winery, sultani grapes for food, grapes with seeds for

•

Europe

•

Karpaz cultural and ethnographic centre for both exhibition and sales

•

Reorganisation of winery factory

Sucuk (one kind of grape product) can be encouraged

Turkish Cypriot Hoteliers Assoc. – Mr. Huseyin Aktig, secretary general:
•

Welcoming the new regulation of Karpaz area, advises for special care and
consideration in developing physical plans regarding remarks of academics

•

and local people

•

either mass-tourism or alternative-tourism

•

characteristics

Turkish Cypriot Tourism is at the edge of choosing one way from having

Eco-tourism is the new trend in the world that meets individual demand

Regional Master Plan is inevitable for the virgin Karpaz area

A Vision for Karpaz
The stakeholders of Karpaz in a workshop using Interactive Management technique was as
follows developed the vision:
- A holy part of an unspoilt beauty where an integrated tourism structuring model,
involving the opinions of related bodies and adopted by the local people, was carried out.
- By finding a solution to the Cyprus problem, facilitating tourism in accordance with
the international law, which would be open to settlement while hosting its legal

8
residents, and ban the construction of private homes over the seacoast and wellpreserved environment with well-planned construction of motel-hotel and guesthouses
over the region.
- Karpaz with a well-protected existing plant population
- A Karpaz where a special project involving our cultural products is implemented and
which possesses “Karpaz National Park” which was put into life as a result of an
international competition within the framework of the “Sustainable Development
Program for Karpaz”

Projects Proposed for Karpaz
Some proposed projects to be developed were proposed in the same workshop as follows:
- Organisation of seminars on personal development, guest-housing, hospitality, hygiene
and health consciousness

- A project that would explore all of the Karpaz villages and their characteristics.
Reflected and shown on signposts placed at the entrance point of the villages and shown
on the maps.
- The protection of marine life (e.g turtles), cleaning of coasts and underwater
observation and support project
- Projects on village guest-housing
- Exploration of the use of historical and cultural heritage by tourism and excavation of
archaeological sites which can then be turned into museums
- A creation of a team that would have an inventory/database of the local environment
and an early warning system

Action Research Taken to Regional Level- Famagusta (2005)
A most recent workshop with the participation of all stakeholders of the city (see Appendix
for the list) the author carried out for the Famagusta municipality and the UNDP produced the
following Vision for the Famagusta Walled City
Vision for the Walled City of Famagusta

• A city that has gained a place in the registered international identity lists of
Europe and the Mediterranean;

9

• Developed its advantage as a tourism port and turned this advantage into
economic gains from tourism and culture; at the same time preserving its
unique cultural and architectural heritage with living functions.

A SWOT Analysis has been applied to the Walled City of Famagusta (see Appendix C).
Although the study has not been finalised yet as a result of this analysis the following
Strategies were some of the priorities of the stakeholders (see Appendix C for the whole list
of strategies:
1. The physical and socio-economic preservation and revitalisation plan of the whole city of
Famagusta should be developed and executed.
2. The city should be prepared for becoming registered as part of the world cultural heritage.
3. The resident and users profile of the city should be analysed.

Secondary Reserarch
Masterplan Work carried out
The tourism masterplan study started in 1996 by the Deputy Prime Ministry and the State
Ministry and was finalised with revisions in November 1999 under the title of “Tourism
Development Plan”. The plan was submitted to the State Planning Organisation, which is the
legal body to introduce the necessary law for the implementation of the plan. This legal
procedure is still pending however there has been Strategic Plans based on the Development
Plan implemented by the relevant ministry especially in years 2000-2001.
The main strategy of the Master plan was based on a SWOT Analysis work given below:

STRENGTHS

OPPORTUNITIES

*With the expansion of Famagusta and
west of Kyrenia there is little large scale
tourism development unlike many other
areas of the Mediterranean
*High quality environmental resources for
tourism
-area of outstanding natural beauty eg
Karpaz
- sites of historical and archaeological
interest eg Salamis, St Hilarion
- Culturally different from other
destinations in the Mediterranean

* To learn from over-concentration of tourism
development on beach resources in other
Mediterranean areas
* To develop a form of tourism that is
economically, environmentally and socially
sustainable
* To develop a distinctive area in the
Mediterranean with a reputation for caring
for its environment and being an example of
‘green low- scale tourism development
* To market these green credentials to
growing niche markets in the West.
THREATS
* Competition from other countries such as
Spain promoting ‘Rural Spain’

WEAKNESSES

* Lack of direct flights from Europe
*Lack of product image
*Accommodation facilities are outdated
and food and general service need to be
more customer oriented

10
* Lack of self catering accomodation such
as ‘country cottage
* Inability to develop tourism product to
reflect changing market trends
* Need for improved public transport
* Highly visible military presence adjacent
to tourist sites.
* Political isolation and lack of public
finances
*Need for tourism planning expert in the
relevant ministry and general institutional
strengthening
* Limited infrastructure development for
tourism
» Main Strategies
̈ Creating Differentiated tourism products based on comparative
advantage over the competitors
̈ Develop tourism based on regional differentiation
̈ Adoption of Special Interest Tourism besides Mass Tourism
̈ Developing tourism to benefit from the natural and manmade
environment for a long period
̈ Developing tourism based on SMEs
̈ Main Strategies (2)
̈ Developing tourism in coordination with the NGOs, local authorities,
private sector and the universities
̈ Adopting a tourism development model in harmony with other sectors
̈ Adopting appropriate models to meet the social, economic and physical
transport facilities
̈ Structure of tourism industry and Policies free from political
influences.

Product Development Suggestions for Different regions are also listed in the plan such as for
G.Magusa:
“While turning the old city into a living tourism product with its history and social mosaic,
reviving Venetian and Ottoman cultures. Functionality and service can coexist with ancient
culture.”
Estimated Visitors, Bed capacity and amount of Investment 8 (2005-2010)
Year
Number of Tourists Number of Beds
2005
369,431
10,348
2006
407,973
11,427
2007
450,537
12,620
2008
497,542
13,936
2009
549,451
15,390
2010
606,775
16,996

11
Due to the unforeseen factors in the Masterplan there has been an increase in the bed capacity
and estimated investments.
The bed capacity in 2005 already exceeded 12,000 9 and the amount of investment in year
2004 and 2005 are given as 550 million US$. The number of tourist estimates remains to be
increasing steadily as foreseen in the Development Plan. The tourist arrivals in the 2004 were
275,711 (162,790 from Turkey and 112,921 from other countries). About half of those
coming from other countries are from UK followed by Germany.
Average length of stay for each tourist was around 5 days in 2004. In 2004 the occupancy rate
increased to 41.2 % from 37% in 2003. The average for the last 10 years (1994-2003) was
35.7%. This increase is a significant 11.3 % increase, which is due to the Annan Plan
Referenda and the opening of the gates.
Analysis and Discussion
Occupancy and Income in Tourism sector (1994-2004) 10
Year Occupancy (%) Income (mil. US$)
1994
37.3
172.9
1995
37.5
218.9
1996
31.8
175.6
1997
34.8
183.2
1998
36.6
186.0
1999
36.7
192.8
2000
37.2
198.3
2001
30.9
93.7
2002
37.8
114.1
2003
37.9
178.8
2004
41.2
?
When one looks at the lower occupancy rates over the last 10 years it is obvious that the
instability stemming from political and economic turmoil is directly affecting the occupancy
rates more than anything else. When there is an improvement in the political atmosphere there
is an increase in the occupancy rates. (See Table below) Two clear examples are 1996-97
when there were border incidents and the negative developments due to EU Luxembourg
summit decision against Turkey’s candidacy. The occupancy rates went down from 37.5% to
31.8%. The second example is when there was a big devaluation of TL in 2001, which led to
major economic crises in Turkey and had a very adverse effect on the economy of Northern
Cyprus (occupancy rates went down from 37.2% to 30.9%).
Kyrenia resorts have better chance than the others due to its reputation.
Especially in Kyrenia the city hotels are doing better than the outside city ones with
exceptions. The exceptions are there because of differences in management.
When we look at occupancy rates for each individual hotel in 2004 it is obvious that there is
no one type of resort (holiday village, hotel, motel, and boutique hotel, small or big) which is
doing well except the Casino/5 star hotels. The performance of others is mainly due to where
they are located and how well they are run. This is mainly due to the unplanned nature of

12
tourism in the North and not having consistent policies towards supporting a type of tourist
profile or a type of tourist resort in the country.
Some typical examples of case studies representing success and failure in the sector are:
̈ Successes
» A small Hotel in Karpaz shores with alternative energy
» An example of guest-housing street in a Karpaz village
» Using Internet marketing for a small hotel outside the Kyrenia city
» A holiday village with the right type of soft and traditional architecture
» A high quality deluxe hotel with Casino at the outskirts of the Kyrenia City
̈ Failures
» A small hotel in the city with low quality Casino clientele
» A big hotel built as a 5-star with casino outside the city with poor management
» A small hotel on a picturesque side on mountains with wrong marketing and
promotion strategy
» A successful 4-star hotel outside the city going down by introducing casino
and loosing its traditional clientele.
̈ Analysing the occupancy rates of individual hotels in 2004
» there is no one type of resort (holiday village, hotel, motel, and boutique hotel,
small or big) which is doing well except the Casino/5 star hotels.
» The performance of others is mainly due to where they are located and how
well they are managed.
» This is mainly due to the unplanned nature of tourism in the North
» Also not having consistent policies towards supporting a type of tourist profile
or a type of tourist resort in the country.
» Property title deeds has not been a determining issue for performance
̈ There is a direct link between which market the tourists are coming from and the
accessibility of Northern Cyprus from those markets
̈ CTA’s performance in Turkey and the UK is reflected in numbers of tourists as well
as political, social and cultural links exist with these markets.

Conclusion and Recommendations
̈ There are four major factors that determine the performance of the tourism sector in
Northern Cyprus
» 1. Political / security developments and the peace process
» 2. Economic conditions as well as accessibility in the main markets (Turkey,
UK & Germany)
» 3. Management/Strategy adopted by the sector
» 4. Management/Strategy adopted by individual tourist resorts

13
̈ The present Masterplan/Development Plan should be developed revised and developed
further with the necessary zonings and phsical plans and should be implemented with
the way of Strategic Plans for shorter periods such as 2-3 years.
̈ The sector needs to look at the Casinos carefully and have a much more clear and
solid policy for this sector. Concentration of Casinos in only one Centre could be an
alternative policy to the current laisssez faire development policy.
̈ Luxury deluxe hotels in the main cities (Lefkosa, Girne and Famagusta) can continue
to be encouraged. Residential areas of the North should not be allowed to become
Centres for casinos and gambling.
̈ There is potential and will amongst the stakeholders in the North to develop
alternative tourism such as special interest, agro, eco type of tourism which can be a
base for sustainable tourism development
̈ Small hotels with less than 100 bed capacity should be organized to promote, market
and finance their operations jointly through either associations or professional
companies with the help of the state or other international funding organizations.
̈ Marketing to individual tourists over the internet could be a way out of political
restrictions as well as the dominance of big tour operators
̈ There is a need to allign the operations of CTA to the tourism strategy adopted.
Tourism markets are not markets without satisfactory transport.
̈ Direct charter flights from UK and Germany and interline agreements with the
Turkish Airlines can be managed even with the existing political constraints.
̈ An intensive training program should be introduced to the sector on sustainable
tourism development, and alternative tourism to mass tourism
̈ There is a dialectic relationship between tourism and peace. While tourism movements
can foster better understanding of different cultures and reduce tension it cannot
flourish in regions where there is a continuous potential for conflict and confrontation.
̈ Therefore, although Cyprus has been very fortunate to attract tourists with its chronic
political problem, it should be understood that the type of quality tourists, which the
country aspires for, might not be willing to spend their most special time in a place
where there is conflict and tension.
̈ This fact on its own should be a reason for pushing for a peaceful solution if Cyprus
wants to continue increasing its economic welfare by way of developing the tourism
sector.
̈ The south has been using predominantly mass tourism to make high gains from
tourism. Considering that the tourism trends are moving away from mass tourism
towards alternative tourism such as Agro-Eco-Special Interest and more focusing on
Niche markets, there is an increasing need for developing new tourism products.

14
̈ The potential that the northern part of the island has provides new opportunities for
joint action. Two-destiny tours, daily tours and joint investments in the field of special
interest tourism in the north could be some business prospects that is worth
considering by investors and business people of both sides of Cyprus.

To conclude there is sufficient evidence and will of stakeholders of the tourism sector that the
economy of Northern Cyprus can benefit from adopting the sustainable tourism policies and
the south will benefit from cooperating with the North in order to develop new tourism
products if it wants to revitalize its once very strong tourism sector.

15
Appendix A
Seminar Programme Participant List:
İbrahim Akançay
Ülkü Akın
Mehmet Hocaoğlu
Duran Gözügüzel
Meryem Özbolat
Gülizar Eroğlu
Halime Akdeniz
Ayşe Gökyiğit
Mehmet E. Karagil
Erdoğan Özbalıkçı
Kemal Gündeş
Arif Özbayrak
Osman Tuğsal
Michael de Glanville
Arif Ersoy
Nergis Sükan
Bengül Pars Arslan
İrdelp Soykan
Lois Cemal
Cemal Akesen
Habib Ali Pour
Serap Uzun
Nerime Uskuri
Mehmet Ozaner
Medine Koca
Hasan Tekel
Özay Öykün
Hüseyin Cumaoğlu
Maşallah Erkan
Şerife Gündüz
Tuğberk Emirzade
İrfan Arıkan
Rengin Kömür
Halil Hepşen
Huseyin Aktıg

akancayi@hotmail.com
Kıbrıs
akin_ulku@mynet.com
BRT
Policeman
dgozuguzel@yahoo.com
Friends of Karpaz
Friends of Karpaz
392 37 44 343
gulizar.eroglu@emu.edu.tr
Friends of Karpaz
Friends of Karpaz
392 375 50 78
Guides Assoc.
kitreb@hotmail.com
mekaragil@hotmail.com
Friends of Karpaz
theresahotel@hotmail.com
Theresa Hotel
Mayor-Y.Erenköy
392 374 43 50
Mayor-Dipkarpaz
392 372 22 34
KEMA
392 22 82 575
Oasis
oasis@ayfilon.com
Friends of Karpaz
392 375 57 93
Karpaz vocational school nergis2011@hotmail.com
Karpaz vocational school bengulpars@hotmail.com
Guides Assoc.
irdelps@hotmail.com
delcraft@superonline.com
Friends of Karpaz
Forestry Department
392 22 84 991
habib.alipour@emu.edu.tr
Tourism School, EMU
Friends of Karpaz
Guides Assoc.
Guides Assoc.
Karpaz vocational school 392 375 57 93
Antiques Department
392 366 55 82
Fishermen Assoc.
392 375 57 93
Karpaz vocational school 392 375 57 93
oasis@ayfilon.com
Oasis
EREC-LAU
serife2001cy@yahoo.com
EREC-LAU
tugberkemirzade@hotmail.com
iarikan@anadolu.edu.tr
Anadolu Uni.

Ziyamet/Y.İskele
G.Mağusa
Dipkarpaz/Y.İskele
Cayirova/ Y.İskele
Y.Erenköy/Y.İskele
Gelincik/ Y.İskele
Ziyamet/Y.İskele
PK 88 Güzelyurt
Y.İskele
Y.Erenköy/Y.İskele
Y.Erenköy/Y.İskele
Dipkarpaz/Y.İskele
64 Kemal Aşık Cad. Lefkoşa
Dipkarpaz/Y.İskele
Buyukkonuk/Y.İskele
Kumyalı/Y.İskele
Kumyalı/Y.İskele
141 Bedrettin Demirel Cad,Lefkoşa
Buyukkonuk/Y.İskele
Orman Dairesi, Lefkoşa
Turizm Okulu, DAÜ, G.Mağusa
Buyukkonuk/Y.İskele
Neral Turizm, Gemikonağı, Guzelyurt
Girne
Kumyalı/Y.İskele
Eski Eserler Dairesi, G.Mağusa
Y.Erenköy/Y.İskele
Kumyalı/Y.İskele
Dipkarpaz/Y.İskele
LAU, Lefke, Guzelyurt
LAU, Lefke, Guzelyurt
A.Ü.TOIYO Yunusemre Kampusu,
Eskisehir
Mehmetcik Culture Asso.
Mehmetcik/Y.İskele
Mehmetcik/Y.İskele
Mehmetcik Culture Asso. mistiki_h@yahoo.com
huseyinaktig@superonline.com PK 604 Girne
KITOB

Appendix B
Famagusta Walled city Workshop participants list:
1- Prof. İbrahim Numan - DAÜ - Projenin Danışma Kurulu Üyesi
2- Naciye Doratlı - DAÜ Mimarlık Fakültesi
3- Kerime Darbaz - Vakıflar İdaresi - Danışma Kurulu Üyesi
4- Emine Pilli - Eski Eserler ve Müzeler Dairesi - D.K.Ü
5- Hasan Tekel - Eski Eserler ve Müzeler Dairesi
6- Layık Mesutoğlu - Şehir Planlama Dairesi - D.K.Ü.

16
7- Ali Öznur - Şehir Planlama Dairesi
8- Eldem Onur - Turizm ve Seyahat Acenteleri Birliği
9- Metin Şahinoğlu - K.T.Otelciler Birliği
10- Suna Atun - Samtay Vakfı
11- Serdar Atai - K.T.Ticaret Odası ve Friends of Nature
12- Mehmet Besmel - Limanlar Dairesi
13- Yılmaz Altunterim - Devlet Planlama Örgütü
14- Hüseyin Araslı - DAÜ Turizm ve Otelcilik Yüksek Okulu
15- Yılmaz Parlan - Esnaf ve Zanaatkarlar Derneği
16- Osman Çağakan - K.T.M.M.O.B. - D.K.Ü.
Davet edilip katılmayanlar:
1- Turist Rehberleri Birliği
2- K.T.Mimar-Mühendis Odaları Birliği
3- Anıtlar Yüksek Kurulu
4- Genç İşadamları Derneği
5- Turizm Planlama Dairesi
6- Suriçi Muhtarı
İzleyici/gözlemci olarak katılanlar:
1- Ahmet S. Örek - Proje Sorumlusu
2- Ertan Öztek - Proje Danışmanı
3- Abide Başman Eryaşar - GMB. - D.K.Ü.
4- Ali Çağlar - UNDP/PFF
Workshop sonrası Danışma Kurulu 2.toplantısına katılanlar (06/05/2005):
1- Ertan Öztek - Proje Kontrol Danışmanı
2- Abide B. Eryaşar - GMB
3- Prof.İbrahim Numan - DAÜ
4- Kerime Darbaz - Vakıflar İdaresi
5- Yılmaz Parlan - Esnaf ve Zanaatkarlar Derneği
6- Bülent Kanol

Appendix C
Fursatlar

Tehditler

KAPILARIN AÇILMASI
VE YABANCI KİŞİ VE
KURUMLARIN ŞEHRE
OLAN İLGİSİNE BAĞLI
OLARAK BUNUN
GETİRECEĞİ MALİ
DESTEK (3)

LİMANIN GELİŞMİŞ BİR
YÜK LİMANI OLMASI VE
BUNUN ÇÖZÜMLE
BİRLİKTE HIZLANMASI (7)

ÇÖZÜMLE BİRLİKTE
GERÇEKLEŞMESİ
MUHTEMEL AB ÜYELİĞİ
(11)
BM, AB VE DİĞER DIŞ
KAYNAKLARDAN

ÜLKESEL FİZİKİ İMAR
PLANININ YOKLUĞU (9)
KÜLTÜR VARLIKLARININ
KORUNMASI KONUSUNDA
HALKIN BİLİNÇSİZLİĞİ
(13)
GİRİŞİMCİLİK,
PROFESYONELLEŞME VE
KURUMSALLAŞMA
EKSİKLİĞİ (17)

17
SAĞLANAN FONLAR (10)

YEREL VE MERKEZİ
YÖNETİMDE TEK
SİYASİ İRADENİN
VARLIĞI (17)
Şehrin Potansiyeli
KALESİ, HENDEĞİ,
MAZGALLARI, KİLİSE
KALINTILARI,
KATEDRALİ, BASİT
MİMARİ DOKUSU İLE
ORTAÇAĞ DÖNEMİ
YERLEŞİM YERİ OLARAK
BUGÜNE GELMESİ.(1)

Mukayeseli Avantaj
Stratejileri
-Kentin tümüne ve Suriçi’ne
yönelik fiziki sosyo-ekonomik
koruma ve canlandırma
planlamalarının yapılması.

-Uluslararası Dünya kültür
listesine Mağusa Suriçinin
kayıt edilebilmesi için
gerekli olan koşulların
BİN YILLIK BİR TARİHE SAHİP
araştırılıp gerekli girişim ve
OLMASI VE ÇEŞİTLİ
düzenlemelerin
yapılması.
UYGARLIKLARA EV SAHİPLİĞİ
YAPMASI.(5)

YÜZÖLÇÜMÜNÜN ÇOK
KÜÇÜK OLMASI
DOLAYISIYLA PROJE
UYGULANMASINA
POTANSİYEL
OLUŞTURMASI (10)
YÜRÜME ÖLÇEĞİ, İNSANİ
BOYUTLARI, DENİZLE
BULUŞABİLME İMKANI. (4)

Savuma Stratejileri
-Oluşan yeni durum
(Kıbrıs konusunda gelinen
son nokta) karşısında
ülkesel bazda iki senaryolu
(çözümün olması veya
olmaması halinde/Maraş’ın
açılması veya açılmaması
halinde) ana kararların
alınması ve 5 yıllık
kalkınma planlarda
bunların yer alması.

-Yerel halkın yaşama biçimi -Koruma alanları, tarihi ve
kültürel dokuyu koruma ve
ile suriçi faaliyetlerin
adaptasyon/uyum kesitlerinin geliştirmeye yönelik
mimarların eğitilmesi için
bulunması için bir çalışma
eğitim çalışmaları (atelye,
yapılması. Kentin kullanıcı
konferans vb.)
profilinin belirlenmesi.
düzenlemek;
-Yapılacak yeni aykırı
-Kültür varlıklarının
binaları ve mevcut eski
korunması ile ilgili
binaların korunmasında
okullarda veya toplumun
yapılacak hataları önlemek
amacıyla yasal çalışabilen bir her kesimine yönelik
eğitim programlarının
yapının oluşturulması ve
uygulanması
Stratejik Yönetim Birimi
oluşturulması.
-Mağusa Suriçi’nin
korunması ve
geliştirilmesine yönelik
olarak bina ve kentsel
doku düzeyinde kılavuz
(guideline) hazırlamak.
-Alternatif (başka bir
yerde) bir liman için
hemen çalışmalara
başlanması.
-Limanın bir bölümünün
acilen marinaya

18
dönüştürülmesi ve
Akdeniz’de bir merkez
haline gelmesi, yat turizmi
açısından.
-Yetki çakışması ve
çatışması olan yasa ve
kurumsal örgütlenme
üzerine çalışma yaparak bu
yetki çakışma ve
çatışmasını ortadan
kaldırıcı yasal
düzenlemeler yapmak.

19
Şehrin Zaafları

İşbirliği ve ortaklik
Stratejileri

TARİHİ VE KÜLTÜREL
BİNALARIN BAKIMSIZLIĞI VE
TERKEDİLMİŞ OLMASI (4)

-UNDP ve UNESCO ile
yoğun işbirliğinde
bulunulması. -Kıbrıs’ta
SURİÇİ VE LİMAN TARAFINDA
ASKERİ YASAK BÖLGELERİN
İngiliz, Fransız ve İtalyan
VARLIĞI VE KENTİN
elçiliklerine çağrı yapıp
KİMLİĞİNE, KÜLTÜREL
ortak işbirliği ve
DOKUSUNA UYGUN OLMAYAN
etkinliklerin
yapılması.
İNSAN SAYISININ FAZLALIĞI (2)
MEVCUT TARİHİ YAPILARIN
GÜNÜMÜZ İHTİYAÇLARINA
CEVAP VEREMEMESİ VE BU
BAĞLAMDA DEĞİŞEN
DEMOGRAFİK YAPI (9)
ORTAK YAŞAM KURALLARINA
UYULMAMASI VE ÇİRKİN,
PLANSIZ YAPILAŞMA (5)

-Yapılacak işbirliği ve
ortaklık sonucu ihtiyaç
duyulan sosyolojik
statistiklerin yapılması.
Anketlerin yapılması.
(Devletin ilgili kurumları)
-Eski Eserler ve Müzeler
Dairesi, Vakıflar İdaresi,
Çevre Dairesi, Belediye
kurumlarından ilgili
kişilerin bulunduğu bir
kurumun oluşturulması.
- Güney Kıbrıs ile de yoğun
ilişkiler kurulması, ortak
vatanın ortak değerlerinin
korunması .
-Suriçi’nde yer alan askeri
bölgelerin sivil otoriteye
devredilmesi için askeri
yetkililer ile işbirliğine
gidilmesi.
-Tarihi ve kültürel binaların
envanterinin çıkarılması.
(Bu envanter içerisinde her
binanın fiziki durumu,
bozulmuş elemanları,
ilaveler vb. olmalı). Bu
envantere göre nelerin
yapılması gerektiğinin ve
maliyetlerinin belirlenip
önceliklerin sıralanması

Kaçış ve sakınma
stratejileri
-Kentin büyük bir ticari
yük limanı olarak
gelişmesinin önüne
geçilememesi senaryosunu
da dikkate alarak
planlama, yaşam ve
hizmetlerin bu vizyona
göre de düzenlenmesi

20

REFERENCES:
Lawson F.and Baud-Bovy, M.. ‘Tourism and Recreation Development- A handbook of
physical planning’
Holloway, J.C. (1994). ‘The Business of Tourism’. Pitman Publishing, London.
Foster, D. (1985). ‘Travel and Tourism Management’. The Macmillan Press Ltd, London.

1

WTO, 1995. “Tourism 2020 Vision”. A new forecast from the WTO.
İbid.
3
CTO and Economy and Tourism Ministry Statistics (2004).
4
WTO, 1998. “Guide for Local Authorities on Devloping Sustainable Tourism”.
5
İbid.
6
Young-Sun (2003), “Tourism cooperation and peace:An example from the divided nation of Korea”. The
Journal of the College of Tourism and Hotel Management, No.3 Autumn 2003.
7
Young-Sun (2003), “Tourism cooperation and peace:An example from the divided nation of Korea”. The
Journal of the College of Tourism and Hotel Management, No.3 Autumn 2003.
8
Tourism Planning Department: Tourism Development Plan (Nov. 2000)
9
Tourism Planning Department: Tourism Statistics (Jan-April 2005)
10
İbid.
2

