CYPRUS

REFLECTING ON PEACE PRACTICE PROJECT

Cumulative Impact Case Study
The Impacts of Peacebuilding Work on the Cyprus
Conflict
February 2008

Dr. Maria Hadjipavlou
Dr. Bülent Kanol

This document was developed as part of a collaborative learning project directed by
CDA. It is part of a collection of documents that should be considered initial and partial
findings of the project. These documents are written to allow for the identification of
cross-cutting issues and themes across a range of situations. Each case represents the
views and perspectives of a variety of people at the time when it was written.
These documents do not represent a final product of the project. While these
documents may be cited, they remain working documents of a collaborative learning
effort. Broad generalizations about the project’s findings cannot be made from a single
case.
CDA would like to acknowledge the generosity of the individuals and agencies involved
in donating their time, experience and insights for these reports, and for their willingness
to share their experiences.
Not all the documents written for any project have been made public. When people in the
area where a report has been done have asked us to protect their anonymity and security,
in deference to them and communities involved, we keep those documents private.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgements............................................................................................................. 1
Map of Cyprus .................................................................................................................... 2
Introduction and Methodology ........................................................................................... 3
History of the Conflict ........................................................................................................ 6
Civil Society Peacebuilding Activities in Cyprus............................................................. 14
Interview Results: Experiences with the Cyprus Peace Process....................................... 23
The Turkish Cypriot (TC) Analysis.............................................................................. 23
The Greek Cypriot Analysis ......................................................................................... 30
The External Participants’ Analysis.............................................................................. 35
Convergence and Divergence: Analyzing Interview Results for Cumulative Impact...... 40
Greek Cypriots: Similarities and Differences in Analysis of Failure
of the Annan Plan.......................................................................................................... 41
Turkish Cypriots: Similarities and Differences in Perceptions of Factors
for Success in the North vs. Failure in the South.......................................................... 46
International Interviewees: Similarities and Differences in Analyses of
Impacts of Peacebuilding.............................................................................................. 48
Concluding Remarks and Reflections............................................................................... 51
Prospects for the Future .................................................................................................... 55
References......................................................................................................................... 57
Appendix: Timeline of Peacebuilding Programs/Initiatives............................................. 61

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to express our gratitude and sincere thanks to CDA Collaborative
Learning Projects for giving us the opportunity to participate in their important and
much needed project “Reflecting on Peace Practices” which has been running since
1999 and has engaged hundreds of agencies and individuals from conflict areas in
an effort to understand and learn about effective peace practices. Diana Chigas has
worked with us closely and advised us on a number of issues. We hope to share the
learning from our case study with many other colleagues with similar struggles to
ours and hope to contribute to the bigger goal of the CDA project and to all
interested parties in Cyprus.
We would also like to thank Larry Fergeson and Izlem Sonmez of the Management
Centre of the Mediterranean and also to Elizabeth Clark, an intern at UNDP-ACT
Cyprus for working with us in the different stages of our case study. The
responsibility for the final write up of the Report lies exclusively with us.
Dr. Maria Hadjipavlou
Dr. Bülent Kanol

1

MAP OF CYPRUS

2

INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY
Background on the Reflecting on Peace Practice (RPP) project and Cumulative Impact
Case Studies
From 1999 though early 2003, RPP engaged over two hundred agencies and many
individuals who work on conflict around the world in a collaborative effort to learn how
to improve the effectiveness of peace practice. The agencies included international peace
and conflict resolution NGOs, as well as local organizations and groups working for
peace in their countries. RPP conducted 26 case studies, and consulted with over 200
agencies and over 1,000 people to analyze peacebuilding experience. The findings of
three years of analysis and consultation are presented in Confronting War: Critical
Lessons for Peace Practitioners 1 , which reviews recent peace practice, assesses elements
that have been successful (or not) and why, and points to learning on how to improve
effectiveness.
The evidence gathered by RPP suggests that although many people do, indeed, work at
many levels, conducting good programs at each level, these initiatives do not
automatically “add up” to peace! RPP found that peace programs that were effective in
contributing to Peace Writ Large addressed key factors driving the conflict; many
programs, however, did not relate their objectives to the driving forces of conflict, and
consequently had little impact on the overall situation. Often, programs that had powerful
impacts on participants’ attitudes and relationships did not lead to activity or changes that
to affect a broader constituency of people, and programs working at the elite or grassroots
levels were often not linked. Good programs had impact on the local situation, only to
see this undermined by national regional developments. In addition, experience showed
that peace programs were not linked to each other in ways that improved joint
effectiveness, and efforts at coordination did not necessarily result in synergies and
increased effectiveness.
While RPP’s findings to date have pointed to many factors that have prevented programs
from “adding up” to have an impact on the overall conflict situation, they have yielded
less evidence on what contributes to the “adding up” process. Key questions remaining
include:
•

1

How do multiple different peace efforts have cumulative impacts on a situation?
What elements and/or processes determine whether there is a positive
cumulative impact of multiple programs, reinforcing what others are doing as
well as responding to changes in circumstances?

Available at http://www.cdainc.com/rpp/publications/confrontingwar/ConfrontingWar.pdf

3

•

How can we link micro (“peace writ little”) and macro (“peace writ large”)
levels in programming decisions in order to improve the impacts of all programs
on the broader peace?

RPP is addressing these questions in new case studies of contexts in which there has been
progress towards peace, in some cases sustained and in others not. These cases look
specifically at whether and how multiple peace efforts have cumulative positive impacts at
particular moments, and how activities and successes at the community or local level and at
the national level can be linked to provide sustainable changes and momentum toward peace.
Over a period of year, RPP will conduct up to 15 cumulative case studies. The Project
will gather experiences and reflections from these contexts, identify patterns and themes
across locations, and highlight important findings concerning how practitioners and
policy makers can improve cumulative impacts of their peacebuilding efforts.
Overview and methodology of case study on Cyprus
In order to assess the impact of peacebuilding activities in Cyprus we conducted a
number of interviews with individuals from both Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities
and with third parties involved in the Cyprus issue. All the interviews followed a
structured pre-themed questionnaire. However, while the questions were asked in a
standardised manner, respondent’s reactions and experiences were respected in the sense
that interviewees could also expand their answers to include personal experiences and
reflections. This allowed for a more in-depth exploration concerning participants’ relation
to the issues of interest. Generally, this approach appears to have been successful. Most
of the participants were interested and enjoyed talking about their personal experiences in
relation to what they perceived to be of importance in the various projects and
stakeholder issues.
In total, 40 people were interviewed between July and September 2008. Interviewees
were working at various levels in their communities and as individuals in different
organisations. Thirteen interviewees were from the Turkish Cypriot (TC) community and
16 were from the Greek Cypriot (GC) community. Of these, 5 Greek Cypriots and 2
Turkish Cypriots were female. The interviewees’ backgrounds included a wide selection
of professions such as NGO activists and leaders, politicians, journalists, academics,
trade unionists and business people. Some supported the Annan Plan, the most recent
comprehensive settlement proposal by the United Nations, whereas others did not. Most
of them had participated in conflict resolution and peacebuilding processes. In addition,
we included analysis of interviews with 11 non-Cypriot third parties – both diplomats and
conflict resolution trainers involved in the Cyprus issue.
The purpose of the interviews was to enable an analysis of individual reflections on their
involvement in the peace process in Cyprus and to assess their impact. All the interviews
were transcribed with the interviewees’ consent. Many of the interviewees are
remarkable in that they have been a part of the most important citizen-based
rapprochement/peacebuilding groups in Cyprus who worked for peace for decades. They
created a process of dialogue and encounters which, since the events in 1974, has been
unique in its intensity and extent.

4

Following an initial analysis, the participants’ responses were compared and
contrasted more thoroughly for their differences and commonalties. This enabled
the final analysis to assess people’s engagement with the complexity of the
underlying issues, either through assistance received in the peacebuilding process
or acts prohibiting it.

5

HISTORY OF THE CONFLICT
The geo-strategic location of Cyprus in the easternmost part of the Mediterranean has
made it vulnerable to outside conquests and interference. Throughout history, whichever
power dominated the region also controlled Cyprus. The island’s archaeological
landscape is full of monuments and symbols of these conquests of different periods
which demonstrate the multiculturalism of the island.
The island is about 42 miles south of Turkey, 64 miles west of Syria, 240 miles north of
Egypt and the Suez Canal, and 500 miles south-east of Greece. It has an area of 3,572
square miles, and currently the island is divided into the Greek Cypriot South (the
Republic of Cyprus, which is internationally recognized) and the Turkish Cypriot North
(the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which is not internationally recognized except
by Turkey).
The Myceneans/Aegean Greeks who came and settled on the island in the 2nd
millennium B.C. formed city-kingdoms on the Minoan model, and introduced the Greek
language and culture as well as Greek political ideas and manner of administration
(Tornarides, 1980). To this day the Greek Cypriots, especially the nationalists,
selectively refer to this period to stress the Hellenic heritage and its continuity to the
present and their belief that “the island has always been Greek.” The Turkish Cypriots
stress the three centuries of Ottoman presence (1571-1878) which determined the interethnic character of the island, and the fact that the island belongs to Turkey.
Under Ottoman rule, the Greek Orthodox Church emerged as a powerful religious and
political institution as the feudal system was abolished, and the land was redistributed
among the Muslim and Christian peasants of the island. There is evidence that when the
Ottomans conquered Cyprus they were treated with some kind of relief or even as
liberators by the Cypriot peasants (Hill 1952, Salih 1968, Stephens 1966). Throughout
most of this period, the Christians and the Muslims had peaceful, cooperative relations.
This history, including jointly staged uprisings against the ruling classes, is used
nowadays by many Greek Cypriots, especially left-wing, to highlight the fact that future
co-existence is possible (Hill 1952, Kyrris 1976, Attalides, 1979). The Greek Cypriot
right and nationalists tend to focus on the tragic events of 1821, when Archbishop
Kyprianos and over five hundred priests and monks were hanged on the charge of
instigating a Greek Cypriot uprising against the Ottomans. This narrative is also part of
the official history textbooks (Papadakis 2005, Koumoulides, 1974), which stress the
‘barbarity’ of the Turkish intervention and invasion of Cyprus in 1974. (The Turkish
Cypriot official narrative calls the 1974 intervention a “peace operation.” (Volkan, 1978))
In 1878 Britain leased Cyprus from the ailing Ottoman Empire to be used as a base from
which to protect the empire against the ambitions of Russia. The island became a British
colony in 1925 and henceforth witnessed the gradual rise of Greek and Turkish Cypriot
nationalisms. The late 1950s was a period of intense inter-ethnic mistrust, fears and
violence. During the anti-colonial struggle led by EOKA (National Organization of Greek

6

Fighters) from 1955 to 1959, the Greeks of Cyprus fought the British for “enosis” (union)
with “motherland” Greece and not for independence. According to Turkish Cypriot
writers (Salih 1968, Nedjatigil, 1997), the Turkish Cypriot leadership expected the Greek
fighters to eventually turn from their fight against the British towards the Turkish Cypriot
community. In 1957 Turkish Cypriots formed the “Turkish Resistance Organization”
(TMT) in an effort to counteract EOKA and started to fight for taksim, which meant
partition of the island between Turkey and Greece. 2 Each community perceived the
other’s organization of fighters as “terrorists.” Adding to the turmoil, during this period
the British politicized intra-communal differences as a tool to serve their colonial
interests in the Middle East, especially after the loss of the Suez Canal (Pollis, 1998).
A compromise settlement, which excluded both enosis and taksim, was eventually
worked out by the three outside stakeholders—Greece, Turkey and Britain—in what
became known as the Zurich and London Agreements, creating in 1960 the ‘reluctant’
Republic of Cyprus (Xydis, 1973). The Zurich and London Agreements established the
basic structure for the new and independent Republic of Cyprus. The imposed
accommodation provided for a partnership republic but with a complicated system of
veto powers allocated to both the President and the Vice President. The Cyprus
Constitution gave the rights to each community to elect their own representations at a
ratio of 70:30, and vote separately for the President, who was to be a Greek Cypriot, and
the Vice President who was to be a Turkish Cypriot. A national parliament with two
communal chambers was established to deal with issues such as education, culture and
religion. Turkish Cypriots, who were 18% of the population, would be represented at a
level of 30% to 40% in the cabinet, public service, police and army. Each community
would have a veto over legislations touching on its vital interests. 3
The Constitution was backed by three treaties. The first established two sovereign British
bases which later were used during the cold war as NATO bases (the Treaty of
Establishment). Under the second, a Treaty of Guarantee signed by Britain, Greece and
Turkey, the three guarantor powers of the island’s independence and territorial integrity
undertook to ensure respect for the Constitution of Cyprus and the state of affairs created.
The three powers thereby granted themselves the right, in the event of a breach, to take
action with the sole aim of re-establishing the state of affairs created by the Treaty
(Turkey invoked this treaty in July 1974 when it intervened militarily in Cyprus). This
provision in effect institutionalized outside intervention and limited the independence of
Cyprus and the state’s flexibility to introduce adjustments to the constitutional structure
when needed. The Turkish Cypriots, however, regarded (and still regard) this treaty as a
safeguard to their security. The third Treaty given to the Cypriots was the Treaty of
Alliance signed between Cyprus, Greece and Turkey entitling the two ‘motherlands’ to

2

Maronites and Armenians and Latins remained largely indifferent during this historical period or opted to
side with the majority which were the Greek Cypriots.
3
When Cyprus obtained its independence in 1960 the Turkish Cypriots comprised 18 percent of the
population and the Greeks 80 percent. The demographics were cited as 82 % Greek Cypriots since the 1960
constitution forced the Armenian, Maronite and Latin groups constituting the 2% of the population to
choose one of the two major communities to belong to. They all chose the Greek Cypriot community.

7

station military contingents on the island on a ratio of 60:40, specifically, 950 Greeks and
650 Turks.
With all these provisions there was little space left for the Cypriots to develop a Cypriot
consciousness and a loyalty to the state and its symbols, as well as to foster common
interests and needs. Independence was interpreted by each community in terms of their
status as majority or minority and their separate nationalistic aspirations, which
continued, even after the Cyprus republic was established (Attalides 1979; Hadjipavlou
1987). Thus, the Greek Cypriots who fought for enosis saw independence as an interim
stage until favourable conditions would allow for enosis, while the Turkish Cypriots saw
it as a stage before realizing their goal of partition. These attitudes and positions were
clearly indicative of the antagonism already rooted in the two distinct national identities.
In addition, the constitutional arrangements were divisive. The Constitution of 1960
lacked any integrative institutions which could have developed inter-communal
cooperation, a common vision and loyalty to the state as well as a sense of Cypriot
citizenship. Educational and cultural affairs were run by separate communal chambers,
and two separate educational systems were closely connected to each community’s
‘motherland.’ Thus, the Greek and Turkish identities were stressed much more than the
common civil identity of Cypriotness (Hadjipavlou 2002, Kyriakides, 1968).
By 1963, the Republic of Cyprus was mired in a constitutional crisis. In November 1963,
President Makarios proposed a series of constitutional amendments that would have
eliminated a number of veto powers and, in his view, made the constitution more
workable. However, past mistrust (emerging, for example, from Makarios’ statements in
1962 regarding his views of the new republic as a stepping stone to enosis) led the
Turkish Cypriot leadership to fear that the amendments were intended to eliminate
Turkish Cypriots’ powers to co-govern the Republic, and to achieve enosis. Turkey also
rejected these amendments. As a result, inter-communal fighting began in December
1963 in what became known as the “Bloody Noel” trauma for Turkish Cypriots. On
December 23, The Turkish Cypriot Vice President , Dr. Fazıl Kütchük, declared that “the
Constitution is dead,” and all Cypriot Turks, from the lowest civil servants to ministers
and Vice-President Kütchük withdrew from the government” (New York Herald Tribune,
Dec. 23, 1963). The Greek Cypriot narrative called this event “a Turkish Cypriot
insurrection to promote partition,” while Turkish Cypriots described this process as an act
of their expulsion from the government and the state apparatus of the Republic of Cyprus.
Strong accusations as to who was to be blamed for the outbreak of violence followed.
Hundreds of people were killed from each side, deepening the mistrust and fears even
further. To prevent a Turkish military intervention in 1964 and Cyprus becoming a
‘Russian Mediterranean satellite,’ the United States proposed the ‘Acheson Plan.’ The
Plan, which essentially envisioned the partition of the island between Greece and Turkey,
was rejected by the Greek Cypriots and Greece and later by Turkey (Patrick, 1976).
In March 1964, President Makarios took the issue before the United Nations. The UN
Security Council reached a decision (Resolution 186) authorizing a UN peacekeeping

8

force (UNFICYP) and a good offices mission. In order to be able to send UN
peacekeeping troops to the island, the UN recognized the Government of Cyprus, then
run only by Greek Cypriots, as the legal government under “the doctrine of necessity.”
This meant that the Greek Cypriot-dominated government would act as the legal entity
until a viable solution could be found for the restoration of the constitution and a
legitimate government comprising of both Greek and Turkish Cypriots.
The inter-communal fighting also resulted in the creation of a “Green line” – a dividing
line in the capital Nicosia to keep the two warring factions apart – and the displacement
of approximately 30,000 Turkish Cypriots to enclaves established for their security in the
major cities of the island (Volkan 1978). The Turkish Cypriot leadership instituted its
own administration and services, established its own laws, police and economic policies
(Attalides, 1979), and gradually became more and more dependent on Turkey. The period
following 1963 was a time of unequal social and economic development, another factor
that tore the two communities further apart. Greek Cypriots experienced economic
prosperity and modernization, whereas Turkish Cypriots entered a period of economic
and cultural dependency on Turkey, which they regarded as their “protector” from Greek
Cypriot domination. The Turkish Cypriot community felt like second-class citizens, as
they were excluded from all state privileges that the Greek Cypriots enjoyed.
1967 saw renewed violence led by General Grivas (and supported by the new military
dictatorship in Greece) against Turkish Cypriots from the village of Kofinou (Kofunye).
Turkey threatened to intervene militarily. Greece agreed under pressure from the UN and
the U.S. to recall General Grivas and the Greek military forces. Under the accord,
Turkish Cypriots were allowed to move freely on the island. Negotiations for the
restoration of the constitution started between the two main interlocutors, Glafkos
Clerides and Rauf Denktash, 4 continuing until 1974. According to Clerides, the parties
nearly came to an agreement in 1973, when President Makarios turned down an accord
reached by the two interlocutors. But the events of 1974 destroyed any prospect of an
agreement. On July 15, 1974, the Greek Cypriot underground terrorist organization,
EOKA-B, with the support of the Greek junta (which in turn was then supported by the
American administration), staged a coup d’état against the Makarios government in order
to bring about enosis with Greece (Stern, 1975). The coup failed, and Makarios survived.
However, it was interpreted as a violation of the Treaty of Guarantee, justifying Turkish
military intervention on July 20. This initial Turkish military intervention was
internationally viewed with understanding. However, by the time of a second round of
talks in Geneva to end the violence, and following the restoration of democratic
government in Greece, a second military attack on August 14, 1974 (in which Turkish
troops occupied 37% of the island) was met with less sympathy. Turkey still maintains
about 35,000 troops on the northern part of the island, an issue that continues to be a
significant source of tension. On the one hand, Greek Cypriots view Turkey as a cause of
their insecurity due to its proximity, size and ongoing occupation of 37% of the
4

The free movement of Greek Cypriots to some of the Turkish Cypriot areas was restricted by the Turkish
military, which did not lift road blocks. This act was perceived by some as a matter of security, but by
others as an act intended to partition the island.

9

republic’s territory. Turkish Cypriots, by contrast, consider Turkey as indispensable to
their security and are reluctant to demilitarize completely.
The Turkish action transformed the Cyprus situation by dividing the island for the first
time both geographically and ethnically. This displaced most Greek Cypriots to the South
and Turkish Cypriots northwards. Whereas the Turkish Cypriots bore the heavier cost in
terms of casualties, missing and displacement between 1963-1967, Greek Cypriots in
1974 suffered most in terms of people killed and missing, other economic and social
costs, and in particular the dislocation of one third of its total population of 600,000. The
militarization of the island began, and an embargo on communication and intercommunal contacts was imposed. New generations of Cypriots were brought up on each
side of the divide without knowing each other. Misperceptions, stereotyping, ‘chosen
traumas’, selective histories and hatred was institutionalized in the education, the media
and the official narratives on both sides.
A series of negotiations began soon after 1974 between the leaders of the two
communities under the good offices of the UN Secretary General. In 1977 the first high
level agreement between the two leaders, Makarios and Denktash, was signed, outlining
the basic principles for a settlement. It provided for a bi-communal federation and
included discussion of the three freedoms (freedom of settlement, freedom of property
ownership and freedom of movement), an important issue for Greek Cypriots. 5 In 1979
another high level agreement between Denktash and Spiros Kyprianou, Makarios’
successor as President, was signed. This agreement reiterated the 1977 agreements and
indicated that the new bi-communal federal republic was to be bi-zonal. It also offered a
series of confidence-building measures, including prospective demilitarization of the
island, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and a commitment to refrain
from destabilizing actions. 6 These agreements and many other previous UN documents
would eventually become the basis for a new comprehensive settlement proposal in 2002
known as the ‘Annan Plan’.
Despite this progress, it was quickly clear that the parties interpreted these guidelines
very differently. The Turkish Cypriots stressed a loose decentralized federation similar to
5

The 1977 agreement consisted of four guidelines:
(1) We are seeking an independent, non-aligned, bi-communal federal republic.
(2) The territory under the administration of each community should be discussed in the
light of economic viability or productivity and land-ownership.
(3) Questions of principles like freedom of movement, freedom of settlement, the right
of property and other specific matters are open for discussion taking into consideration
the fundamental basis of a bi-communal federal system and certain practical difficulties
which may arise for the Turkish Cypriot community.
(4) The powers and functions of the central federal government will be such as to safeguard the
unity of the country having regard to the bi-communal character of the State.
High Level Agreement of 1977, available at http://www02.mfa.gov.cy/mfa/mfa.nsf/
73819879AFA2E8AAC2256B7B004DA64B/$FILE/High%20Level%20Agreement%201977.doc.
6
The word “bi-zonal” does not actually appear in either agreement, but is implicit and has been accepted
internationally as the basis for the bi-communal federation. High Level Agreement of 1979, available at
http://www02.mfa.gov.cy/mfa/mfa.nsf/ 5408FB462E61E7BDC2256B7B004DACA4/$FILE/
High%20Level%20Agreement%201979.doc.

10

a confederation, whereas the Greek Cypriots emphasized a strong centralized federation
that resembled a unitary state. The situation also evolved, introducing new issues and
difficulties in the negotiation process. In 1983 the Turkish Cypriot leadership, with the
full support of Ankara, unilaterally declared independence. The Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus (TRNC) failed to gain recognition by any other country but Turkey,
which meant international isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community and increased
dependency on Turkey both economically and politically. Greek Cypriot characterization
of the TRNC as an “illegal” or “so-called” state led to efforts to prevent any implicit
recognition of Turkish Cypriot sovereignty, including a de facto economic embargo on
the Turkish Cypriot community that was backed by a decision by the European Court of
Justice in 1994. 7 This isolation generated enormous resentment in the Turkish Cypriot
community, and contributed to economic stagnation in the North while the Greek Cypriot
economy boomed during the 1980s and 1990s.
In addition, over the years the demographic composition in the North has changed with
the influx of people from poor regions of Turkey, creating what has become known as
‘the settler problem.’ A recent census in the North established that around 46,769 settlers
came in the 1970s and gained Turkish Cypriot citizenship. Another 70,525 settled in
Cyprus but still hold Turkish (not Turkish Cypriot) citizenship (including students and
temporary workers). At the same time, thousands of Turkish Cypriots emigrated to other
countries, mainly for economic reasons and in search of a better future. The Turkish
Cypriot leftist and opposition press often spoke about the Turkish Cypriot community
becoming almost a minority vis-à-vis the “settler problem.”
The most recent initiative, led by UN Special Representative of the Secretary General
Alvaro De Soto, took place in the shadow of Cyprus’ accession to the European Union
and with European Union support (Bryant 2004a, 2004b, Tocci 2004, Joseph 1997).
After start-and-stop negotiations from 1999-2001, in November 2002 the UN presented
to the leaders of the two communities a proposal known as the “Annan Plan.” This
comprehensive plan, comprising 182 pages of main articles and another 9,000 pages of
annexes, stipulated a solution within a federal framework with simultaneous inclusion of
the whole of Cyprus within the EU. The plan was revised several times in 2002 and 2003,
but in April 2004 the final version was defeated in simultaneous referenda, with Greek
Cypriots voting “No” by 76 % and 67% of the Turkish Cypriots voting “Yes,” with the
support of Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
The Turkish Cypriot “Yes” vote represented a dramatic reversal of position, as Rauf
Denktash had rejected the third draft of the Plan as late as March 2003. Prior to the
referenda, mass mobilization and public demonstrations led by the left and the centre-left,
the youth, unions and business and NGOs in the North all supported a change of
leadership and of the status quo. This ‘revolution from below,’ with the support and
participation of many peace builders, forced the Turkish military and the Turkish Cypriot
leadership to open some check-points across the Green Line, allowing thousands of
people to cross to the other sides. The opening of gates was a new era for the Turkish and
7

The European Court decision prohibited EU member states from accepting agricultural products from
Northern Cyprus without phyto-sanitary certificates issued by the Greek Cypriot-controlled Republic.

11

Greek Cypriots. Turkish Cypriots were able to claim back their rights to the citizenship of
the Republic of Cyprus (and later EU citizenship), and Greek Cypriots were able to move
freely around the island for the first time since 1963, visiting their old property and
homes as well as re-uniting with former co-villagers. In late 2003, elections brought a
change in leadership amongst the Turkish Cypriots, as Mehmet Ali Talat of the leftist
Turkish Republican Party defeated Rauf Denktash, and brought the pro-solution forces to
power in the North.
On the Greek Cypriot side, however, Tassos Papadopoulos of the centre-right DIKO
party became President in early 2004, backed by the communist party AKEL and the
socialist party EDEK. He promoted the view that the Annan Plan was pro-Turkish, and
that it did not respond to the Greek Cypriots’ need for security and human rights. In his
view, accepting the plan would have meant the dissolution of the Cyprus Republic
without any guarantee that the agreement could have been implemented, given Turkey’s
untrustworthiness. These different and competing interpretations of the Plan became
manifest in the referenda results on April 24, 2004. After the Annan Plan’s defeat, some
Greek Cypriot politicians referred to the ‘Europeanization’ of the conflict, expecting a
better deal once Cyprus became an EU member.
This failure of the referenda marked a new turning point in the recent history of Cyprus.
A week after the referenda, on May 1, 2004 the Republic of Cyprus became a member of
the European Union without a solution. Yet again, the lack of trust and a shared vision
led to competing results and the deepening of divisions. The shared EU agenda bicommunal peace builders had promoted over the years did not prove strong enough to
overcome collective mistrust, fears, leadership intransigence and historical grievances.
The “crossings” to and from the North and South helped smooth out many old
stereotypes and misperceptions, while at the same time creating new and different
relationships. However, the post-referenda political climate was mainly one of renewed
mistrust and feelings of betrayal, especially among the Turkish Cypriot left (Turkish
Republican Party). They had expected the Greek Cypriot left (AKEL) to vote “Yes” to
the Plan, but AKEL instead had characterized it as an “Anglo-American” plan which did
not serve the interests of the Cypriot people.
The adversarial discourse at the official level created frustration among the pro-solution
people in both communities, and weakened engagement in the rapprochement and
peacebuilding work. A recycling of the conflict culture re-emerged, with continuing
consequences to the present time. Fewer people from both communities crossed to the
other side. Many politicians, both left and right, as well as peace builders express fears
that the partition of the island is deepening. Adding to the tension and complicating
future negotiations, many foreign and local developers started building on Greek Cypriot
land in the north after the referenda and selling it to foreigners. By 2006, the North was
experiencing an economic boom. Greek Cypriot refugees and their organizations
protested strongly and demanded the cessation of this activity. In turn, some Turkish
Cypriots who wanted to regain the right to their property in the South were rejected by
the Greek Cypriot establishment on the grounds that they were not living in the South.

12

Some others had their properties confiscated for the “public good” without any
compensation.
The latest UN initiative was a meeting between the leaders of the two communities under
UN auspices in July 2006, in which both leaders agreed to the establishment of technical
committees to discuss both day-to-day issues and issues of substance. International
attention has focused on how to help the Turkish Cypriots get out of their political and
economic isolation, but these efforts have been frequently blocked by the Greek Cypriot
government. As of February 2008, no progress had yet been achieved, and the impasse at
the macro level continued apart from the EU initiative to transfer 259 million Euros in aid
to the Turkish Cypriot community. Much of this funding will go to building
infrastructures, institutional support and promoting bi-communal peacebuilding projects.
However, the victory of AKEL leader Dimitris Christofias in the second round of
presidential elections in the Republic of Cyprus on February 24, 2008 brings the
possibility of change in the Greek Cypriot attitude, and perhaps the restart of negotiations
and the promotion of closer contacts with the Turkish Cypriot leadership.

13

CIVIL SOCIETY PEACEBUILDING ACTIVITIES IN CYPRUS
In this section we shall highlight the peacebuilding activities that have taken place on the
island from the late 1970s to the present day. Most of these activities have been funded
and run by outside third parties. The main theories of change upon which these activities
operated have been Gordon Allport’s (1956) ‘contact theory’, Herbert Kelman’s
assumptions about the social psychological aspects of international conflicts, 8 the
humanistic approach to mediation and Roger Fisher’s ‘win-win’ theory of negotiations. 9
Communication theories have also been adopted.
Since the late 1970s, many conflict resolution workshops have taken place to bring
together members of both communities in Cyprus to learn about one another, share
experiences and build greater cooperation and trust, in an effort to make progress towards
a solution. These workshops started slowly in the beginning, supported and driven mostly
by the international community. But through the 1980s and especially towards the end of
the 90s, they gained momentum and flourished. Bi-communal groups were formed
around many issues and skills training. By the late 1990s a group of thirty citizens from
both communities were trained as conflict resolution trainers and thus took ownership of
the work. After the opening of the checkpoint in 2003, bi-communal projects lost
momentum. However, there are still many efforts today supported by the international
community as well as Cypriots that are continuing as we shall see below. The following
is a sampling of some of the conflict resolution workshops, their agendas and results. (A
more detailed list is provided in Appendix C).
‘Problem-solving workshops’ in Cyprus began in 1966, after the first inter-communal
violence and the call from the international community for talks between the leaders of
the two communities. The ‘father’ of the approach, John Burton, and his colleagues in
London offered a five-day workshop in controlled communication that brought together
high level representatives from the two communities in a safe academic environment to
think jointly and produce new ideas that would have then helped restart the official
dialogue process. The result was positive, and official talks did resume between the two
sides. In 1973, an informal seminar was held with political leaders of the two
communities in Rome facilitated by Prof. Leonard Doob. After that successful meeting,
Doob (1974) 10 made offers of a workshop in Cyprus in the summer of 1974. Due to the
tragic events of that period, it could not be conducted. He did succeed, however, in
holding similar workshops in 1979 and 1984. He termed these workshops ‘psychological
sensitivity’ trainings; they focused mostly on helping participants understand one another
better and build mutual trust.
After Doob’s initial success, more international third parties conducted workshops in the
80s. In 1984, Professor Herbert Kelman conducted a bi-communal workshop on
interactive problem solving sponsored by the Middle Eastern Affairs Institute in
Washington D.C. and held in Cambridge, Mass. The main premise of this unofficial
8

See Kelman, 1997.
See Fisher, Ury and Patton, 1991.
10
See Doob, 1974.
9

14

process is that international conflict does not concern only the states and official
diplomacy but the societies and the citizens as well. Therefore, citizens have a role to
play in the unofficial process. Citizens from the conflicting parties are brought together in
a safe unofficial environment to engage in dialogue in which each party presents their
fears, concerns and hopes and a deeper understanding of the other (the perceived enemy)
evolves. The process then invites each side to identify the obstacles to peace and then
generate new ideas and projects as to how to overcome these obstacles. Sometimes a joint
report or a policy paper is produced which is then circulated to interested parties in both
communities and also to third parties involved in the conflict.
From 1988 to 1993, Professor Ron Fisher held several conflict analysis and problem
solving workshops with an extensive focus on the role of education in peacebuilding. In
1989, the British Friends of Cyprus Committee also held a dialogue meeting amongst
high level educators from the Turkish and Greek Cypriot communities to discuss the role
of education (primary, secondary and tertiary) in a future federal bi-communal Cyprus.
This meeting was held at Ledra Palace, an old hotel that remained in the buffer zone after
1974 and where almost all bi-communal activities were held until 1997. The participants
in this meeting produced a report and a press release which were sent to politicians. The
report stressed the importance of education in peace talks and invited the leaders to
include the issue of education in their agenda.
In 1989 The German Institute for Education, Democracy and Preservation of the
Environment invited 20 Cypriots – ten from each community – to a four-day conference
in Berlin to engage in open dialogue on the current political situation and how it affected
inter-communal relations, and to reflect on their role as citizens. Follow-up meetings
were held at the Ledra Palace. Institutionalizing into the first bi-communal social and
political movement, ‘Citizens Joint Movement for a Federal and Democratic Cyprus.’ in
1990, this group met without a third party mediator, coordinated bi-communal efforts
with UNFICYP, and helped select participants for the ongoing workshops. Cypriots
began to take ownership of these workshops and create groups and organizations to
address specific issues. Its goal was to mobilize ordinary citizens in the unofficial
peacebuilding process, in the belief that this would put pressure for the resumption of
official negotiations. The group hosted many public discussions to share ideas, goals and
positions of political parties in both communities. It hosted diplomats at Ledra Palace to
discuss federalism, in addition to meetings held to jointly study federation and how it was
understood in each community, as well as cultural events and intra-communal activities
and discussions aimed at changing perceptions and attitudes. 11
The 1990s saw a continuation of workshops by international third parties as well as the
beginning of Cypriot-initiated organizations. In 1991, the Peace Centre Cyprus was
officially registered as an NGO in the South. The Centre (www.peace.org.cy) is dedicated
to peace education, dialogue among the communities, trainings in conflict resolution and
empowerment of youth in both mono- and bi-communal activities. Its formation was
strongly supported by the international community. In July 1991, Louise Diamond, a
11

For more details about this process see Hadjipavlou -Trigeorgis, 1993.

15

conflict resolution specialist from the Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy in the United
States, visited Cyprus at the invitation of members of the newly formed Peace Centre and
began offering workshops on conflict resolution. Initially, one workshop was held in each
community. In October 1992 a joint steering committee was formed for the purpose of
promoting the conflict resolution efforts in Cyprus and helping third party trainers in their
work on Cyprus. By July 1993, Diamond was able to convene a workshop on conflict
resolution skills and communication in Oxford, England for a group of ten Greek
Cypriots and ten Turkish Cypriots. Among the participants in that workshop were the son
of the Turkish Cypriot leader and the daughter of the Greek Cypriot leader. This initiative
was leaked and was immediately politicized by the mass media in both communities, who
demonized the “Oxford Group,” as it was called, as a pawn of the interests of the AngloAmericans. This gave the group the opportunity to promote conflict resolution. They
held a press conference to explain what conflict resolution and the Oxford workshop
were about, and subsequently wrote articles and held public talks in various cities
informing the people about the field of conflict resolution and its relevance to Cyprus.
After that workshop, a series of workshops in conflict resolution were held in the summer
of 1994, organised by the Cyprus Fulbright Commission (CFC) and conducted by the
Cyprus Consortium, a group of American organizations that consisted of Institute for
Multi-Track Diplomacy (IMTD), the Conflict Management Group (CMG) and the
National Training Laboratory (NTL). The Cyprus Consortium continued to offer
trainings in 1995-96 and 1997. These workshops included communication skills,
negotiation and mediation, problem solving and project design processes. They brought
Greek and Turkish Cypriots together in a neutral space (outside of Cyprus or in the buffer
zone) to learn and practice skills of communication, conflict analysis, and cooperative
problem-solving and create new possibilities for dealing with the conflict. The workshops
were directed to a wide range of sectors: ordinary citizens, professionals, youth, women,
educators, and others. Significantly, political leaders from all the major parties on both
sides were also targeted for the first time, in order to enhance the legitimacy of bicommunal conflict resolution efforts. From these trainings a core group of Cypriot
trainers emerged who would facilitate workshops in their respective communities.
In addition, the Fulbright scholar initiative was introduced by the Cyprus Fulbright
Commission and at the request of the Peace Centre, the aim being to have a scholarpractitioner stay on the island for a longer period and work with local bi-communal
groups. One of these scholars was Prof. Ben Broome, an experienced third party
practitioner who worked in Cyprus from 1994 to 1996. He offered seminars, trainings
and workshops in conflict resolution and bi-communal activities to many groups,
including youth, business leaders, women’s groups, young political leaders and
educationalists. Using a new methodology, Interactive Management (IM), from October
1994 – June 1995, he also worked with participants from the summer of 1994 conflict
resolution workshops and others to develop a strategy for the peacebuilding efforts in
Cyprus. The group met weekly and occasionally on weekends, initially monocommunally, because at that time the political situation did not permit bi-communal
meetings, as from the fall of 1994 until February 1995, Turkish Cypriot participants were
denied permits to cross to the buffer zone. The products of this group was the formulation

16

of a joint vision that could act as a guide for peacebuilding activities at the citizens’ level,
a system analysis of the obstacles to peacebuilding efforts in Cyprus, and a plan of
activities that would guide their work over the following two or three years. Moreover,
they prepared fifteen projects including workshops, presentations, training programs and
other events and staged an agora/bazaar where individuals were invited to sign up for
several bi-communal projects. Nearly 300 individuals signed up and became involved in
twelve Cypriot-led bi-communal projects. 12
One of the most inspiring projects that emerged from the 1995 workshops was an
initiative called the Youth Encounters for Peace (YEP), which brought together numerous
groups of young people ranging from the ages sixteen to nineteen around common
experiences or interests to create trust, knowledge of the other and a sense of possibility
for peace. YEP started in July 1997, with two-day gatherings that brought together thirty
Greek Cypriots and thirty Turkish Cypriots. Between 1997 and 2002, more than eleven
additional groups were formed, bringing together hundreds of young people. The groups
sponsored musical concerts, festivals, dances, tree-planting and workshops. They also
developed a co-villagers project in Pyla, which in July 1999 brought together Cypriots
who had lived in the same village before 1974. As a result of this event, Cypriots who
had not seen each other for twenty-five to thirty-five years were re-united at emotional
gatherings that included the exchange of food, drink, photos and in some cases treasured
personal items that had been left behind in 1974 and saved by neighbours or the present
residents of their houses. 13
Another Fulbright Scholar, Prof. Marco Turk, later offered a series of mediation training
programs which started in 1997 and continued through 1999 using the “humanistic
approach.” 14 These mediation trainings included both bi-communal and mono-communal
groups and consisted of programs ranging from fifteen to forty hours of instruction,
exercises and role playing. These workshops were offered to bi-communal citizens
groups, teachers, psychiatric nurses, a Turkish Cypriot women’s group and mental
healthcare professionals. When the bi-communal activities were interrupted for political
reasons in December 1997, Turk took several bi-communal groups outside Cyprus for
training in mediation and negotiation. One such group was the “Oslo group,” which
produced an important report on all aspects of the conflict and proposed joint ideas for
solutions.
By 1997, there was a flourishing of special bi-communal interest groups, including
women’s groups, students, young environmentalists, businessmen, educators, academics,
citizens groups, a choir, artists, management groups, HADE magazine (a bi-communal
magazine featuring articles written by the members of both communities about the
peacebuilding efforts in Cyprus including stories about bi-communal groups, specific bi12

For details see Broome, 2005, and Hadjipavlou, 1998.
Another youth movement, Youth Promoting Peace, was started in 2001 with similar goals and linkages to
YEP. This movement has organized tree-planting in Pyla and youth conferences on rapprochement, among
many activities.
14
See http://rjp.umn.edu/Copy_of_Restorative_Justice_Princples-43ea0f56df14c.html (accessed May 15,
2008) for further information on this approach to mediation.
13

17

communal events and the experiences of individuals who have visited places on ‘the
other side’ for the first time), co-villager groups, lawyers and accountants groups, internet
groups, federation study groups and EU study groups. Then, in 1997, in response to the
EU’s Luxembourg decision giving the green light for the start of accession negotiations
with Cyprus, TC authorities closed the checkpoints and forbade bi-communal activities.
Some activities did continue, with groups meeting in Pyla, a bi-communal village on the
ceasefire line, despite the ‘ban’ on bi-communal activities and harassment of participants.
Due to the difficulties in crossing during 1997, Tech 4 Peace, a Cypriot civil society
organization dedicated to improving communication and trust building among youth in
Cyprus, established a website, www.tech4peace.org in 1998. This website was the first
peace portal in Cyprus, funded by UNOPS. It aimed to bring the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot communities of the island closer together by creating a virtual society for
those interested to work together on collaborative projects and stay informed on
developments. It provided links to all bi-communal groups, as well as to major
international organisations active in the field of peace and organisations that provide
funding and support for such efforts. Mailing lists and directories of members, a calendar
of upcoming events, interactive magazine, on-line polls, and a library of resources were
also offered.
In 1998, asked by US State Department to create a program for Cypriot youth, Seeds of
Peace began its project in Cyprus. The Seeds of Peace group, supported by the Cyprus
Fulbright Commission and staffed with facilitator-trainers that had been trained by the
Cyprus Consortium and Fulbright scholars on the island, brought together Cypriot youth
in the United States for a summer camp at which they ate and slept in the same premises
and had the opportunity to discover their common heritage. During the camp, the Cypriot
facilitators conducted conflict resolution workshops for the youth, taking them, for
example on a “walk through history,” in which important dates in Cypriot history were
marked. This exercise brought up contentious issues which gradually moved the youth
beyond recriminations and toward active listening and exploration of identity and
stereotypes, leading to mutual understanding and trust. After their camp experience, the
youth returned to Cyprus and met daily on the internet to continue their debates. They
also participated in follow up workshops to enhance their coexistence training.
The program graduated up to one hundred youth from both communities.
After the opening of the checkpoints in 2003, and the 2004 referenda on the Annan Plan,
the momentum waned for the structured bi-communal meetings sponsored by
international or Cypriot organizations. A new need arose to revisit the agenda and goals
of the peacebuilding process in Cyprus. At the present time, there are several bicommunal projects undertaken by Cypriot organizations, many (though not all) of which
are funded through UNDP or the US Embassy. Youth projects continue to be a major
focus, and are among the few still focused on dialogue and conflict resolution. ‘Let’s
Unite our Beautiful Island’ is a youth group that very recently came together on
FaceBook, and held its first meeting between youth, parents and family on 6 August 2007
to discuss the present situation and the need to encourage more dialogue and cooperation.
‘Provision of Multicultural Youth Camp Training’ by International Child Development

18

Initiatives is another effort that seeks to promote the organisation of successful youth
camps by organizing multicultural youth camp trainings, establishing a network and
developing camp models. ‘Playing for Peace,’ aims to develop youth leaders, deliver
training in both single-community and inter-communal settings and help children foster
trust and relationships using the game of basketball. And the ‘Youth Dialogue Project’
seeks to engage youth between 15 and 24 years of age in both communities in exploring
jointly the dynamics that shape their attitudes and aspirations. Using youth-designed
surveys and input from experts in youth matters, the project aims to produce a quality
analytical and authoritative report on the state of young people in Cyprus, focusing on
their challenges, attitudes and aspirations for the future, as well as a Cyprus Youth
Charter to be used as an advocacy tool with political leaders and decision-makers in both
communities. UNDP also ran six youth camps in 2006 with over 260 youths participating
and 8 more camps in 2007, and AMIDEAST supported additional youth camps for
college-age as well as high school students. 15 These camps provide a venue for youth to
explore their activities of interest in a bi-communal setting. Surveys have shown that
youth from these camps maintain cross-communal contact long after the camps, and have
higher levels of trust for each other and a stronger belief that they have things in
common.
Initiatives to integrate tolerance and respect for different cultures into the education
system on both sides have also been undertaken. The Association for Historical Dialogue
and Research conducts projects on education and history teaching. It coordinates with
POST on the project Education for Peace, which has analyzed the revision of history
textbooks in the Turkish Cypriot Community. They are now working to develop trainings
for teachers so they are more prepared to teach the new history textbooks. A similar
project, the History Teacher Training Project by the Centre for Democracy and
Reconciliation in Southeast Europe (CDRSEE), aims to enhance the understanding of
multi-perspective history teaching by providing training and supplementary textbooks to
teachers. In the schools, an anti-racism, anti-nationalist group was formed in reaction to
events at the English School, 16 in which Turkish Cypriot students were physically
attacked by Greek Cypriots from the outside. Another of these projects is Conflict
Resolution & Peace Education (CRE/PE) by the Mediation Association, KAYAD, Peace
Centre, and British Council, which aims to promote awareness of CRE/PE throughout
Cyprus, and train 1,600 Turkish Cypriot elementary school teachers to teach this subject.
15

For example, the ‘Bold Leaders’ program, supported by AMIDEAST, seeks to increase strengthen
communication and conflict transformation skills of youth, and increase inter-cultural understanding of
Greek and Turkish Cypriot youth and support their leadership in promoting reconciliation. See
http://www.cyber-reality.com/BoldLeaders/whatisit.aspx (accessed April 22, 2008). The Cyprus America
Scholarship Program (CASP), starting in the mid 1990s, began holding two week intensive summer
programs at the School for International Training in Vermont for college aged participants. This initiative is
ongoing, and provides students with a combination of skills training, dialogue sessions, outdoors
teambuilding activities, social and recreational activities and created an environment which built intercommunal confidence from living together. See http://www.amideast.org/programs_services/
exchange_programs/casp/bi_communal_programs.htm (accessed April 22, 2008).
16
The English School is a private, English-language (British) secondary school in Nicosia that served all
the communities in Cyprus until 1974, when the student body became primarily Greek Cypriot. After the
opening of the checkpoints in 2003, the school re-integrated Turkish Cypriots into the student and faculty
bodies.

19

The trained teachers will then introduce new skills, such as responsibility, tolerance,
integrity, self-esteem, conflict resolution, cultural and interpersonal competence,
restraint, decision-making and vision-building.
Bi-communal women’s initiatives, environmental projects and efforts to preserve
historical or cultural structures are also among the activities being conducted. For
example, Hands Across the Divide (HAD) is an independent women’s organization which
is promoting a gendered analysis of the conflict, supports reunification of the island and
gender mainstreaming in all policies and institutions as well as promoting the elimination
of all forms of violence. Another organization works to revive the old city of Varosha 17
and Famagusta and it works alongside with New Cyprus Party (YKP), German Cypriot
Forum, Friends of Nature Cyprus, TC Teachers Trade Union (KTOS), Cyprus Art
Association (KSD), Rights and Freedoms Association. They all support the need to find a
solution for Famagusta.
One unique post-referenda activity was in the area of economics. With sponsorship from
British High Commission a group of economists from both sides supported by
international experts and coordinated by the Management Centre conducted research on
how to achieve economic convergence before and after a solution the findings of the
research relating different sectors such as tourism, higher education, labour mobility,
adoption of Euro and green line trade were presented in five conferences during 20052007.
What has been the impact of all this work and efforts will be discussed further on in this
Report. Nevertheless, much work continues today to encourage Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots to engage in a new dialogue about the present day deadlocks and future
possibilities on the island. It is amply acknowledged that any solution would need the
citizens’ cooperation and commitment for it to work. And this is what the citizens’
peacebuilding process has being trying to do in Cyprus.

Funding
The funding for these bi-communal activities and workshops was initially provided by
the US Agency for International Development (USAID) directly or through the Cyprus
Fulbright Commission or, for programs in the United States, AMIDEAST. 18 USAID
later channelled most funding through the United Nations. From 1998-2005, the UN17

Varosha was developed as a tourist area, with high-rise hotels, to the South of the old town of Famagusta.
The properties were mostly Greek Cypriot-owned, and following the events of 1974 and the division of the
island, Varosha was fenced off. It has remained unoccupied since then. Several efforts by the United
Nations to promote confidence-building have proposed a reopening of Varosha and return of Greek Cypriot
property in the fenced area, but to date none has succeeded.
18
The America-Mideast Educational and Training Services, Inc. (AMIDEAST) is a private, nonprofit
organization that aims to strengthen mutual understanding and cooperation between Americans and the
peoples of the Middle East and North Africa. AMIDEAST provides English language and professional
skills training, educational advising, and testing services to students and professionals in the Middle East
and North Africa. It administers educational exchange programs, including the Cyprus-America
Scholarship Program (CASP), which provides scholarships for Greek and Turkish Cypriot college students
to study in the United States, and since 2000, the Bi-Communal Support Program established by the US
Embassy in Cyprus. See http://www.amideast.org/default.htm (accessed April 1, 2008).

20

based Bi-Communal Development Programme (BDP), created to help foster positive and
cooperative relations between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriots by helping them to
design and implement projects of common interest, worked with over 300 different
Cypriot organizations and supported some 220 projects. The programme was funded by
USAID with additional funding from UNDP totalling $67 million over 7 years. These
projects had a strong focus on supporting educational and cultural exchanges, youth
projects and empowering NGOs to play a more active role in promoting a dialogue in the
Cypriot society. One of the main achievements of this program was to fund the
establishment of the Management Centre (www.mc-med.org) in the North and the NGO
Support Centre (www.ngosupportcenter.org) in the South, which worked sometimes bicommunally and sometimes in parallel to foster cooperation between the communities as
well as building the capacity of the Civil Society in both communities. (See Appendix C
for more details).
BDP was succeeded by UNDP-Action for Cooperation and Trust (ACT), launched in
October 2005. It is managed directly by UNDP and has a total budget of $26.5 million for
three years (October 2005 – September 2008). The project funds over one hundred
projects with the aim of increasing cooperation and trust among all communities in
Cyprus. Each project must have a bi-communal component to the project. Although all
one hundred projects must strive towards the aim of promoting cooperation and trust,
each approaches this objective differently. Some do so by creating advisory groups,
strengthening the capacity of civil society organizations, or restoring the rich cultural
heritage of the island. Other projects promote cooperation and trust more concretely
through youth camps, education initiatives, CR trainings or bi-communal youth
programs. The Cyprus Civil Society Strengthening Program (CCSSP), launched by
funding from the UNDP-ACT and implemented by a consortium consisting of INTRAC,
The Management Centre and the NGO Support Centre, has been the largest civil society
capacity building program implemented in Cyprus with an aim of promoting trust and
institutionalizing cooperation between the two communities to work together to
strengthen the Cypriot civil society and increase the capacity of the NGOs.
The United States Embassy retained its own direct funding mechanism, appointing a Bicommunal Coordinator in the 1990s and institutionalizing its funding mechanism in 2000
with the establishment of the Bi-Communal Support Program (BSP). This program
allows Greek and Turkish Cypriots to explore issues of common concern together
through theme-based projects in areas such as education and health, youth leadership and
crisis management. Activities BSP has funded include youth camps, English language
programs, professional development study tours of the non profit sector to help youth
better understand civil society’s role, and environmental workshops. BSP programs are
administered by AMIDEAST, a U.S-based, non-profit organization that maintains staff
and an office in Cyprus. In addition to the AMIDEAST programs, BSP also oversees a
small-grant fund that supports bi-communal projects that cost under $10,000. With the
help of these grants, Cypriots support their own bi-communal undertakings in Cyprus. 19
19

http://nicosia.usembassy.gov/TheEmbassy/Bicom.htm (accessed April 22, 2008).

21

Following the referenda, funders shifted focus from dialogue, rapprochement and
exploration of federalism and other issues to civil society strengthening, sustainable
development, environment and education and youth. This was partly a reaction to the
intense criticism levelled at international funders (the UN especially) by the Greek
Cypriot Government of biased support and inappropriate advocacy for the Annan Plan in
their funding policies.

22

INTERVIEW RESULTS: EXPERIENCES WITH THE CYPRUS PEACE PROCESS
This section aims to illuminate some of the experiences surrounding participant
engagement in the Cyprus peacebuilding process. For the purposes of this analysis, the
responses from the interviewees were categorised into five themes: motivation of
involvement, obstacles encountered, positive elements, turning points in the process and
recommendations from the participants for future processes. These themes illustrate the
commonalities and differences experienced by members of each community as they
reflected on the peace process in Cyprus. We decided to first analyze the data from each
group (Turkish Cypriots, Greek Cypriots and the third parties) separately but using the
same thematic categorization and then attempt a comparative analysis highlighting
convergence and divergence.

The Turkish Cypriot (TC) Analysis
Motivation of involvement of the interviewees in the peacebuilding process
Participants from the Turkish Cypriot community began their involvement in the
peacebuilding process for various reasons. The isolation experienced by the community
as a whole from non-recognition of the TRNC contributed greatly to many of the
participants’ personal reasons for engaging. However, at an individual level there are
some interesting findings. Some TCs became involved in the peacebuilding process
because they were invited to attend a meeting or a workshop or other types of gathering
by an individual they knew personally. Invitations at the behest of the American
Embassy, Mediation Association, Fulbright, PRIO (Peace Research Institute of Oslo) and
Management Centre also drew many participants into the fold. Still others were invited
because of their professional involvements in trade unions, journalist organisations, and
academic pursuits.
On the intrapersonal level, motivations for getting involved in the peacebuilding process
stemmed from tragedy, personal belief systems and curiosity about ‘the other.’ Some
participants became engaged in the reconciliation efforts because they had lost family
and/or property during the violent phases of the conflict. They wanted to somehow
reconcile how their experiences shaped their ideas, fears and hopes and how these factors
would influence their futures both individually and collectively. Still others felt an inner,
deep desire to find out what happened to the Greek Cypriots (GC) with whom they had
interacted and whom they remembered from years past when they lived in mixed
villages. At the other end of the spectrum, there were many who wanted to participate in
the peacebuilding process because they had never been allowed to interact with people
from the South and were curious about who they were. Others joined the peacebuilding
process because they ascribed to an idealistic and peace-centered personal philosophy of
life. This particular group of Turkish Cypriots (TC) followed their hearts and wanted “to
live in peace and stop the bloodshed” or simply and perhaps more practically to be
involved in a process that aimed to “reach a settlement that would satisfy both sides.”

23

Positive Elements
The excitement of what would be discovered on this adventure into the unknown was
bound to produce positive elements on both sides of the Green Line. The analysis of the
TC community showed these positives in different areas. One of the most powerful and
fundamental for TC participants was that “the feeling of being Cypriots in these
workshops [is what] binds people.” This feeling of solidarity helped foster other positive
outcomes: establishing good friendships, learning each other’s language, GCs realizing
TCs are like them, learning how to be unbiased and break social and political taboos,
practicing how to put oneself in the other’s shoes without fighting and developing
different and evolving views about peace and the Cyprus conflict.
From these positive elements came fruitful developments. The idea that peace contact
was important to pursue despite the politicians’ desire to the contrary led TCs to continue
working with their GC counterpart activists to sustain these peace activities and to work
to reduce the “feelings of hostility and hatred [which] must disappear.” These ideals were
pursued through tangible bi-communal activities TCs undertook and participated in:
establishing camps for youth, creating a bi-communal choice, establishing the trainers
group that started with the Cyprus Consortium and continued with Ben Broome. They
also motivated the desire to rewrite Cyprus history books for schoolchildren..
From the social point of view there were many successful activities at an individual level
that led to positive, collective social impacts. These included:
- In 1996, at the urging and with the help of bi-communal groups, a huge public bicommunal activity convened by the UN at the Ledra Palace, with thousands
attending, following “violence and an increase in tension along the ceasefire lines
unparalleled since 1974.” 20
- In 2002, a Common Vision document created and signed by 86 organizations calling
on the leaders of the two communities to come to a settlement and outlining criteria
for a solution.
- Mass demonstrations calling for signing of the Annan Plan and the resignation of
Denktash, staged by a coalition of 91 NGOs, opposition political parties, the Chamber
of Commerce and trade unions under the banner, “This Country is Ours,” and
attended, according to some sources, by about 60 to 80 thousand people.
- Human chain activity on both sides of the Ledra palace in support of a solution, as
well as small demonstrations during the Clerides-Denktash dinners where TC women
gathered in the streets chanting, “It is enough, reach an agreement and let’s join the
EU together.”

20

Report of the Secretary General on the United Nations Operations in Cyprus, for the period 11 June – 10
December 1996, UN Doc S/1996/1016 (10 December 1996), In August, 1996, a group of 120
motorcyclists arrived in Cyprus with the intention of crossing the cease-fire line. Although President
Clerides appealed at the last moment to the group to stop, several hundred Greek Cypriot demonstrators
entered the buffer zone and clashed with Turkish Cypriot troops, police and counterdemonstrators. Turkish
Cypriot counterdemonstrators were allowed to enter the buffer zone, and beat the Greek Cypriots with
batons and iron bars, killing one person. A second Greek Cypriot died in clashes that occurred several days
later. Id., para. 4-6. Following the clashes, relations between the two sides became very tense.

24

With these activities it is estimated that 100.000 people were reached. That was roughly
equal to the 65% TC who said yes and the entire “yes” vote on the other side.
These social achievements led to two other realisations. First, money started to flow from
outside interests, bringing more international players to Cyprus to support peace-related
activities that had impact. The availability of funds from the EU and USA increased and
gave rise to international embassies playing a greater role in bringing the two
communities together. This was especially true with the US embassy. (It should be noted
that trade unions raised their own funds as they felt activities carried out with external aid
would have been artificial). The Cyprus Fulbright Commission, with US money,
sponsored much of the conflict resolution (CR) work in the 1990s. Other influences, such
as businessmen, people from trade unions united, the Brussels group, 21 the Oslo group, 22
the National Democratic Institute and the Harvard Study Group 23 contributed to the
development of parameters and functions that were acceptable to both sides.
Second, the people discovered that they were in fact sincere about a solution, but their
leaders were not. The change in the leadership of the TC Chamber of Commerce had a
big influence over TC society in terms of finance, spirit and ideas in promoting peace and
stronger relations with EU. This was the first time that the TC businessmen dared to
confront the establishment in the North and joined forces with the rest of the civil society.
Two main platforms emerged out of this struggle: the “Common Vision” platform led by
the TC Chamber of Commerce which mobilized the civil society organizations outside
the public sector and other than the political parties and the unions, and the “This country
is ours” platform formed in 2000 and comprised of mainly public sector unions and the
political parties. These two platforms managed to put aside their differences in internal
economic and political issues and join forces under the banner of “Solution and EU” to
stage the mass demonstrations to mobilize a “yes” vote to the Annan Plan.
Another aspect of social cohesion came from the power of the pen or maybe more
appropriately, citizen based journalism. Examples include the gatherings of trade
unionists and their very significant activity of creating a common terminology amongst
the varied groups. This monumental step stimulated cooperation and writing in each
other’s newspapers. At least one TC participant claimed that with these activities he
“started writing articles in the GC newspaper Politis.” 24 Additionally, a bi-communal
magazine HADE was published, and from the TC perspective at least, participants tried

21

The Brussels group is a bi-communal business association facilitated initially by then US Special Envoy
for Cyprus Richard Holbrooke, which developed a number of practical proposals for cooperation (Lende
1996)
22
The Oslo Group rought participants in the mediation trainings run by Marco Turk together in Oslo in
1998. The group produced a statement of shared values and substantive proposals for a settlement.
23
The Harvard Study Group was facilitated by the World Peace Foundation at Harvard University and the
Cyprus Consortium It brought informed and influential Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots to enrich
thinking on the Cyprus issue and facilitate progress towards a negotiated settlement (Chigas, 2008,
forthcoming).
24
“Politis” is the third largest Greek language newspaper on Cyprus. It is centre-right, but independently
owned.

25

to reach as many people as possible through press articles, radio and TV programs (but
GCs did not do the same).
TCs felt that the positive elements derived during the peace process had an impact on the
(TC) yes vote. Those TCs who attended activities made an effort to lobby for the “yes”
vote on the Annan Plan in the TC community. TCs believed that the Annan Plan was a
direct result of bi-communal discussions, and that this, in turn, led TCs to work hard for
the yes vote and “explain the Annan Plan every day to others.”
Obstacles
TC interviewees identified a wide range of obstacles in the peace process, due to the
overwhelming feeling that they were fighting “for” instead of “against” something, as
they perceived GCs to be doing. The empowerment of people in the peace process events,
mass public demonstrations and political change helped to fuel the hopes of many TCs,
and when the 2004 referendum votes were counted, all that had been worked for was
deemed a loss. The perception of obstacles increased because the stakes were high, and
the TCs had invested much emotion and pride.
The obstacles identified focused on personal conflicts, political harassment, military
involvement, financial accusations, media propaganda, and TC society and external
forces. However, the TC participants focused mostly on blaming “the other” (GC).
Although this is nothing new in the Cyprus problem, this time the scars of the past were
exposed and damaged so severely as to impregnate the TC community as a whole with a
poison that still festers deep under the skin today. After the loss of the referendum, TCs
felt betrayed and neglected, that “the GCs do not want us, that is why they said ‘no’.” It
left the impression and reinforced the widely held notion that “GCs did not want the TC
as equals, as counterparts, as countrymen, as brothers or even as part of the Cyprus
landscape.” Peace activists lamented that they had “neglected family time at the expense
of work” on projects and meetings,” and some of those involved in peace process lost
their jobs or were “harassed” from both sides. Those who had sacrificed so much and
were so hopeful now felt as if they had put it all on the line only to be betrayed.
The truth for many TCs by 2007 was “that TCs are not a part of GCs’ lives anymore.”
This type of rejection “flows deeper than the colours of the Mediterranean that surrounds
us all.”
This attitude toward TCs was perceived as coming from the top down as reflected in
comments that “the unwillingness of the GC administration to share the Republic of
Cyprus,” and that “the GC government tried to prevent bi-communal activities-because
they are happy with present situation.” Some TCs believed that the GC government
deliberately designed a misinformation campaign so that the GC public “would not be
informed about Annan Plan” and that it “failed to make use of the media,” thereby
leading the GC people to remain under the influence of the leaders and not think for
themselves. The role of the Greek Orthodox Church and its funding of activities to
dissuade the “yes” vote came under criticism as well. TCs also held that “through the
church and education system, the GC youth are brought up to be hostile towards Turks”
thereby making the young generation “status quo oriented.”

26

On a more personal level, the TCs perceived obstacles in the GC psyche, stating, for
example, that “the psychology and mentality of the GCs is not mature or settled,” that
“the GCs do not perceive the TCs as equal partners,” that “mentally the GCs have an
obsession against the TC identity; their main reason for living is to reduce the TCs to
servitude,” and that “federation to Turks is confederation to Greeks.” If one side in a
dispute has this type of perception of their counterpart, the possibility for progress
becomes almost non-existent because of a basic lack of respect for them. It also leads to
an intractable atmosphere tainted with near nationalistic accusations, such as: “the GCs
rejected it [the Annan Plan] because of their greed,” and “the GCs have to accept that the
TC people have a separate sovereign state and have to stop believing Cyprus is a Greek
island.” The heightened climate of distrust has led to the notion that “expansionist
nationalism is a dominant force in Greek Cypriot and Greek politics.” TCs began to lash
out against GC after the ‘No’ vote with statements like, “if they don’t want us then we
will build houses on their lands.” As a result, the two communities came to the point of
breaking off and coming apart yet again.
A second powerful force blamed for obstruction of the peace process was the TC political
structure. Politicians were accused of “contaminating” the atmosphere and not telling the
truth to the people. “We came across many obstacles. Those who were against the regime
of 15 of Nov. 1983 were taken to court and attacked by [the right-wing] Volkan
newspaper,” said one TC peace activist. Nationalists were considered as a major threat to
bi-communal activities, and politicians were seen as too influential vis-à-vis both NGOs
and the media, so that there was “no independence of civil society.” The political
machine was also blamed for the role it played in keeping the communities apart;
meetings with GCs were difficult because “getting permissions before the borders opened
was a long procedure that had to be approved.”
The negative message from TC political leaders after the referenda estranged the two
communities even more and led to feelings that “when RTP took office the NGOs were
told to go back to their duties, and thus the NGOs were silenced or others [who had
conspired with the government] were rewarded by being appointed in significant
positions; the others who wanted to be critical were abolished completely.” Because of
political “corruption,” in 2007 very few people believe in the peace process. Looking
inward from the political spectrum, TC participants began to believe that “we failed to
institutionalize, and the reason was Denktash, who threatened us and said the moment we
institutionalize he would ban it.” More serious allegations that the government was
involved in the murder of prominent journalist TC Kutlu Adalı further sullied the respect
for the political apparatus.
TC peace activists claimed that two forces were working in partnership with TC
politicians: the Turkish military and the TC media. Although the TC media was cited by
some TC participants as detrimental to the peace process, their influence was nowhere
near that of the GC media. However, there were some similarities, noted by those who
claimed “the media treated those who crossed as traitors” and “did not report on bicommunal activities so as to inform others,” and so were negligent in their duties as

27

professionals and servers of the public good. A parallel can be drawn here with the
perceived actions of the Turkish military, who in theory, are in Cyprus to protect and
serve the public like the media. They too were accused of “portraying activists as
traitors” and conducting “interrogation at the crossings.” This tandem effort made by
these parallel forces to dissuade participation can explain why the military and media
could be seen as tools for the political machinery.
External forces also raised the ire of the TC participants reflecting on past attempts at
peace. Statements deriding the guarantor powers as a “problem” the United States as a
country that “uses people like guinea pigs and has a double agenda” show how deeply
resentments of external forces run. The old adage “divide and conquer” was revived in
the TC comments about the use of political ploys by the US and Britain. Some reported
they were convinced that “Anglo-Americans planned everything in Cyprus and tricked
the TCs to say yes [to the Annan Plan],” suggesting that the American and British
ambassadors went to Talat and requested that he “keep on constructing buildings because
this will force Papadopoulos to come to the table.”
As always, Turkey did not escape harsh criticisms about, for example, “Turkey’s policy
of delay of the settlement for when she enters EU while the TC people are lost in
despair.” Some felt “the biggest threat is Turkey’s military, its intelligence units and
people collaborating with them”. One TC remarked that because of the meddling from
the motherland “in 15-20 years the GCs will be negotiating peace with Anatolians.” 25
Yet TC peace activists also strongly suggested that “the motherland’s suggestion for yes
was the determining factor” in the entire peace process and dictated some of the
outcomes.
Other external groups drew some scathing responses as well, even though these forces
(the UN and EU) enjoyed relative popularity amongst the TC community. A TC peace
activist criticised the international community for their lack of support, commenting that
“(the) UNDP and the Civil Society program did not give any funds to TCs who were
involved in bi-communal groups so as not to upset the regime.” This misstep caused a
great strain on the peace activists who needed the monies to help mount and maintain
support for the process. More unforgivable and hurtful was the abandonment experienced
in relation to the EU’s admission of the Republic of Cyprus (the South) even after GCs
voted against the peace process. TCs “felt cheated that we were not going to enter EU
together” as a whole country.
Finally, the public at large was denounced for their shortcomings in the process. Most in
the TC community were remembered as being “people apathetic and disappointed,”
suffering from a “lack of trust and confidence not only among leaders but people too.”
TC peace activists decried: “the Cyprus issue is not an individual problem,” and “very
few people know what a bi-communal, bi-zonal federation means.” TC participants were
threatened by this public ignorance and believed “TCs are in the process of extinction.”
The “biggest threat is inertia brought forth by the continuation of current situation,” many
noted.
25

“Anatolians” refers to mainland Turks who have come to live and work in Cyprus.

28

Turning Points
The major turning points for the TC participants in the peace process can be mainly
categorised into memories of “before” and “after” the referendum. With the outcome of
the voting, one might assume that the biggest turning point from a TC perspective would
be, as one interviewee said, “when the GC community voted not to approve the Annan
Plan”. However, a close inspection of the interviews tells a different story. The
participants almost foreshadow the future with their remembrances of the time before the
referendum and how the proverbial handwriting on the wall started to become visible to
those most deeply involved in the peace process.
Every historic event that took place from within the TC community in which they
overcame seemingly impossible odds and challenged the political and social structure in
ways that strengthened the peace activists became tainted with the reality of nonacceptance by their fellow Cypriots. Tantamount significance was also attached to the
opening of the crossings; many people thought the “border crossing made easier in 2003
the opportunity to get to know each other and erase the GC’s image of the poor TCs
living in poverty and under oppression and occupation.” They hoped “the opening of the
borders-would make many prejudices disappear,” but even the concrete benefits
attributed to the opening of the borders, such as TCs being able to work in the South,
soon became overshadowed with a clearer vision of the practical and negative realities
that “there is no political will on either side,” and that “TCs youth saw what the GCs are
like, (they were) not ready to embrace and see them as equals.” This was especially true
of recollections of the mass demonstrations in support of the Annan Plan. What originally
was believed as a way to “instil in the GCs the belief that they can live together with
TCs” and was thought to have “convinced the people of Morphou who would have been
relocated to vote ‘yes’” 26 soon became “demonstrations that the GCs only watched.”
External factors were also seen as all-pervading in the Cyprus problem. Turning points,
positive and negative, were linked to “the accession the Republic of Cyprus to EU and
the EU membership process for Turkey, which is associated with the Cyprus conflict”
The motherland’s presence was cast as a dark blot on the efforts of the TC peace
activists’ efforts as it always seemed to overshadow local efforts. The pervasive feeling
that “Cyprus is an EU problem, not one of the island’s people” consistently eclipsed the
actions of those in the TC community who were giving of themselves so that the
movement would prevail. This reality was referenced with dismay in such declarations as
“in 1997 when a resolution passed against Turkey in Luxembourg the conflict resolution
process was banned.”

26

Morphou is a market town in northwestern Cyprus. Before 1974, its population was almost entirely
Greek Cypriot, but it is now under Turkish Cypriot control. The GC population was forced to leave in
1974, and subsequently, TCs displaced in 1974 and earlier, as well as migrants from Turkey proper, settled
there. Under the Annan Plan, Morphou would have returned to GC control, and GC properties, now
occupied by TCs and Turks, would have been returned to their initial owners.

29

Obviously, the time immediately following the historic vote in 2004 can now be judged
as a dark time for the TC community, as many were disillusioned and felt once again the
painful realisation of isolation “when the majority of GCs voted no.” The referendum,
however, was not the only election that the participants remembered as monumental. One
turning point was noted when “the parties in favour of a settlement came to power in
Turkey and the North” and another in the fact that GCs “elected an administration in the
South which did not favour a settlement.” The latter however proved to be much more
powerful and influential than the former.

The Greek Cypriot Analysis
Motivation of involvement
Peacebuilders from the Greek Cypriot community began their involvement in the peace
process for reasons similar to those of the TC community. However, on closer
examination, differences begin to emerge. Generally, GC participants joined the peace
process due to ideological beliefs. Many were intellectuals or elites who had lived and
were educated abroad. As in the TC community, organisations played a significant role.
Participants came from the likes of the Cyprus Academic Forum, HAD-women’s group,
theoretically involved as scholars or as political leaders from a party promoting
rapprochement and solution. GCs also came from business groups, because of the
influence of party politics. They became involved for a variety of reasons: the fact that
Louise Diamond was coming to the island, because of the Oxford Group publicity or
simply as activists looking for an alternative. Others got involved after the opening of the
check points in 2003 so that “my children will have the chance to meet TCs and dispel
many things they hear about the TCs.” There were also professionals who entered at the
invitation of third parties.
Interpersonal reasons compelled many GCs as well. There were participants who were
products of a mixed marriage, had family members missing but were from mixed villages
and had TC friends or had met and developed friendships with TCs during their student
years abroad and thus were more sympathetic to and interested in the TC community as a
whole.
Intrapersonal reasons were seen in such statements as “commitment to a solution” but
overall were less common than for TC participants. Of course, curiosity played a role
since in the 1990s the only way to go to the other side was to join a bi-communal group.
Many participants had progressive political views.
Positive Elements
The GC participants in peacebuilding activities had views similar to their TC counterparts
of the positive elements that came from their involvement. There was a general consensus
that positive things were happening, such as efforts to solve concrete problems. They also
appreciated the acquisition of the ability to “get into the other’s shoes.” The Conflict
Resolution workshops of the 1990s helped many people come together and gave a
holistic view of the conflict. The GCs found the TCs more cultured than expected. This
provided an avenue for a real in-depth dialogue on each side’s needs based on values of

30

mutual acceptance and the ability to see the other as an equal. GC participants reported
that workshops were helpful in understanding ‘the other’ and helped them to “realise they
[TC and GC] have common goals.” These interactions helped eliminate stereotypes in
GC participants’ minds, and the shared activities brought the communities closer and
helped establish many personal friendships. The GC participants were able to recognise
that the TCs genuinely wanted a solution and saw the Annan Plan as an opportunity to get
out of the isolation. Additionally, an interest to learn the conflict resolution process and
pass it on to other GCs was mentioned. When this type of breakthrough happened, many
GCs questioned their assumptions and beliefs and in turn viewed peace related activities
with more tolerance. Some were led to devote all their free time to the peace process.
Despite these positive elements, GCs felt that positive feelings alone could not bring the
solution. This pragmatic approach seems to differ from the almost euphoric feelings of
TC optimism. Another difference from the TC experience of peacebuilding concerned the
activities most valued. While TCs emphasised present- and future-looking activities, the
activities valued by GC participants could be categorised as emphasizing the rectifying of
the past. Examples include joint symposia to celebrate together the struggles of the
1940s, research on property issues and how well the refugees were informed (PRIO),
reconciliation projects such as identifying the bones of missing persons in both
communities, joint activities promoting common workers’ struggles and efforts to
establish a memorial in Lefka village in the North to honour the struggles of miners from
both communities. This is not to say that the bi-communal social activities did not at least
dabble in the then present (or hopes for the future) or that many activities were not
thought of as well-structured. Many GC people attended concerts, sporting events, etc.
Further examples, such as the youth camps for 14-16 years olds, co-villagers meetings,
the bi-communal choir, the HADE magazine and the HAD women’s group, speak to the
success of the many bi-communal cultural activities that took place
Interestingly, the GCs who participated in the peace process developed positive views on
the possibilities that reconciliation could contribute to the future. One GC put it this way:
“This [the activities] helped us decrease nationalist dependency and view Cyprus as a
common homeland.” Another said, “We [GC participants] imagined a reunited country
and would be better off socially and economically in the long run.” The accumulation of
experience and knowledge from meeting with “the other” led GCs to be hopeful.
Like their TC counterparts, GCs were not as favourable when it came to views on outside
forces. Embassies, foreign governments and funding from these sources were seen in a
conspiratorial light as almost corrupting the process and the outcome of future
reconciliation measures. Within their own political parameters, however, the GCs were
optimistic at events such as the establishment of a bi-communal bureau in the right wing
party (DISY), the hope for change in GC community in the forthcoming presidential
elections (February 2008), 27 meetings of political party leaders and joint activities, and
changes in the behaviour of DISY (such as holding Cyprus, rather than Greek, flags).
27

In February, 2008, AKEL leader Dimitris Christofias was sworn in as President of Cyprus, having
eliminated incumbent President Tassos Papadopoulos in a surprise upset in the first round of elections, and
subsequently defeated DISY candidate and former foreign minister Ioannis Kasoulides in the second round.

31

Non-politically, there were favourable impressions around the CR workshops in the
1990s. They were perceived as well-designed, and generally GCs thought that the
training of trainers was needed, that Benjamin Broome’s approach was positive, and that
the fist bi-communal “vision statement” was a good development. Additionally, youth
projects were thought of as good and positive, and the need to learn about each other, and
cooperate regarding education systems, environmental problems and how to combat the
infestation of drugs, etc. was seen as strong. Civil society dialogue groups also continued
in a more systematic way to produce concrete products, i.e. on economy, media,
environment and the establishment of a new bi-communal forum that started in Brussels
in 2007.
Obstacles
On the whole, participants in the GC community expressed their dismay at internal
factors by looking toward the outside for obstacles in the peace process, more so than the
TCs. This could be one aspect of the multi-faceted explanation of the overwhelming “no”
vote by the GCs. GCs tended to be less self-reflective, as the analysis has shown,
especially when it came to the difference in perception of internal factors versus external
ones. It is very common among GCs to use the ‘conspiracy theory’ to suggest the role of
outside intervention in the creation of the conflict. One GC interviewee decried the
“excuses of external factors to avoid what we should have been doing” as a fatal mistake
in the peace process.
Some internal reasons could be attributed to a lack of “social infrastructure.” Such
capacity deficiencies included what the participants referred to as “the difficulty to make
the transfer of change from a small group to wider public,” mainly due to a lack of honest
communication. Inward reflections were also emphasised regarding the inability of the
participants to adequately publicise their campaign and what they had garnered in their
bi-communal experience and then relate it to a public. This was attributed to an inability
to “market our product.” Bi-communal activities were seen as more of an academic and
an elite process and not a grassroots one. Many participants thought the late start of the
“Yes” campaign, the language barrier-exclusion, difficulty in finding local funding (as
opposed to external funds), and the perception that these activities were treacherous and
naïve were detrimental to the continuity of positive elements. Another common concern
was that politicians and average people felt threatened by bi-communal activities, and
that peace builders were vulnerable because they did not have enough political power to
engage the government or to bring people from different organizations into the fold.
Being short of resources, they could not spread information effectively, and the lack of
institutionalization caused a fragmentation of efforts. The lack of specific programs
regarding dissemination of information about the Annan Plan, combined with what some
participants contributed to as “no vision or theory” for the peace process in Cyprus, made
it difficult to overcome the obstacles. Wider audiences who thought the workshops a
theoretical exercise that did not touch real political realities just could not be reached.
A part of the existing “infrastructure” that did have the capacity to contribute positively
and could have served the public and the civil society peacebuilders’ momentum more
efficiently was the media. The media engaged in demonizing the Annan Plan, and the

32

misinformation about the Plan exaggerated fears to the point where there was confusion
for the public around what was being said through social networks compared to what was
being broadcast via the media outlets. The media also played a vital role in allowing
UNDP-ACT bi-communal programs to be demonized in the hands of a small group of
rejectionist journalists. 28 As a result, the bi-communal process was discredited, and some
provisions in the Annan Plan, such as security, property, and voting rights, and were
thought of as despicable by many in the GC community.
On a political level, participants expressed feelings of disassociation, with statements
such as “we did not have a movement.” This perhaps took on additional weight because
of the TC community’s historic marches and demonstrations. The GC participants felt
that the nationalist rhetoric was too strong with its “references to the past” and physical
imagery of Turkish Cypriot separatism, such as the big Turkish flag on Pendadactylos
mountain overlooking Nicosia. The perception that many politicians “built their careers
on the Cyprus conflict” did not help to bring more group cohesion either, as those forces
worked against whatever “Yes” movement had actually begun to develop and gain
strength. Subsequent confrontations between pro-settlement GC political factions on the
left and right did not help matters because the politicians then became “the obstacles,”
and issues of compromise were not part of any party’s official policies. These factors led
bi-communal activists to assert that politicians contributed to a “lack of motivation,”
“disillusionment,” “lack of hope,” and the feelings that “the status quo is o.k.” and that
“we are fine.” Many people seemed to realise that they could survive by themselves
without the other side, as if the division is part of the solution. Papadopoulos was accused
of using fear and accusations to scare the GCs and of perpetuating the ideology of
separateness and loss in order to prevail. Many GCs thought Talat would be more
compromising but were disappointed when this did not materialise.
External factors that eventually became obstacles include both inter-state and intra-state
activities. The presence of the Turkish army on Cyprus soil contributed to apprehension
and confusion of the peace process. Other external elements included suspicion of US
agenda in Cyprus, and, consequently, of the US-funded conflict resolution workshops.
Ignorance pertaining to what “the EU is and means as a political alliance” was exploited
by extremists on both sides. As far as figure heads were perceived, the UN special envoy
for Cyprus Alvaro De Soto was portrayed as arrogant and diabolic, while UNOPS was
characterised as “a mess” and as “having behaved like neo-colonialists who looked at us
as a job to be done with no consideration for local sensitivities.” UNOPS’ lack of a clear
strategy and insufficient transparency exacerbated the fears of the GC community.
GC reflections on the peace process included failures in the GC community as well,
especially the political structure. The usual suspects were identified as major obstacles,
including:
- The apathy of GC leaders toward the TC demonstrations in 2002-2003,
- The “Denktash conviction” that the two communities cannot live together
28

UNDP came under attack after the referendum for allegedly supporting the ‘yes’ campaign through the
activities they funded, and for interfering Cyprus’ internal affairs. An investigation of UNDP finances was
launched in the Parliament in the south, and accusations of impropriety lingered for several years.

33

-

Perceptions of TCs as foreigners and not as compatriots,
GC anger about TC use of and building on GC properties in the North.

Interviewees also felt that the dynamic of the crossings was not utilized by GC
politicians, and that the church and nationalist GC refugee associations used their full
power and influence to pursue a tremendous negative campaign. AKEL was also seen as
a political party that violated all the history and principles of the left movement in Cyprus
and sold out to obtain power in the government.
Turning Points
GC interviewees identified milestones or “turning points” in their experience in the peace
process in the following ways. The first pertained to the original conflict resolution work
or what came to be known as the “training of trainers,” because this step was a “powerful
step in the right direction for what would become multiplier groups” and ultimately
became what some consider the beginning of the citizen-based peace process itself.
Taking into account all the progress that was accomplished within the training group, the
next significant turning point happened outside of the functions of the training group but
was a direct manifestation of their initiatives. The political forces were influenced to such
a degree as to increase their activities by holding “the dinner meetings of Clerides and
Denktash,” where the discussions centered on the Annan Plan. This type of informal
meeting in a relaxed atmosphere gave the appearance of a gradual move toward
friendship and reconciliation because it was not held at a formal, neutral UN-sanctioned
or foreign-hosted meeting place. The whole of Cyprus as well as the world saw the first
glimmer of hope in these affairs because the news was covered island-wide and
internationally. Out of the “dinner diplomacy” came the promise to really pursue the
issue of the missing persons by “the opening of mass graves on both sides”. Being stalled
for fourteen years with not a single body recovered, the fact that the political leaders were
now being active themselves renewed the promise of a solution and gave heart to those in
the peace process that one of the most decisive issues in the Cyprus problem could be
addressed and finally overcome.
Another hopeful and perhaps bigger turning point came next when a topic that had
festered nearly as long as the issues surrounding the missing persons began to be
addressed: the separation of the Cypriot peoples themselves. The “opening of the
borders” in 2003 was an immeasurable sign of hope that the peace process could yield
tangible results for all Cypriots island-wide. For the first time in almost thirty years
Cypriots could physically reunite with what had become only concepts in their minds:
friends they had lost, properties in which they had lived, villages they had grown up in,
etc. The ability to cross was more than just simple journeys to the other side. These
journeys “had an impact” and “helped build trust.” The “GC realized how cordial the TC
was who kept their valuables.” This realization more than anything else revealed the
humanity and bond between the communities, despite the conflict. With this came an
understanding and hope for the future. Furthermore, the opening of the crossings also had
an effect on the mindset of the GC participants, in that physically going to North allowed
them to visually see how life was like for the TC community; especially regarding “the
influence of the [Turkish] army on TC lives.” For the first time, GCs could perceive the

34

separation as it was experienced by the TC community, rather than just how the
separation had affected only the GC community.
Contrasting with the TC views of the demonstrations in the North, the effect of the
demonstrations was negligible from the point of view of the GC peace activists. Most of
the GCs were simply spectators, which at the least, shows the lack of solidarity and real
understanding. It seemed as if those demonstrations were confusing to the GC
community, possibly because the GC had been subjected to such a long history of
misinformation, not only about the nature of TC life and politics, but also about the
nature of the TCs’ challenges.
The change of political leadership on both sides (as well as in Turkey) was also
considered an important turning point by many of the GC interviewees, mostly with
regards to how the Annan Plan was going to be presented to the GC community. For
GCs, this was a negative turning point, because Clerides’ electoral loss to Papadopoulos,
coupled with the “GC coalition government, especially with AKEL in power,” was an
indication that the momentum the peace activists had created was now facing a
formidable opponent and increasing opposition to the Annan Plan. Under the
Papadopoulos administration, for “first time the GCs realised what a solution would look
like” if the Annan Plan was approved. As hindsight teaches, this administration did not
provide accurate and unbiased information regarding the Annan Plan, and it soon became
apparent that the Papadopoulos administration was determined to squash all support for
it. This perhaps more than any other factor proved to be a major turning point in the
peace process in the GC community. Finally, many GCs viewed the accession of the
Cyprus Republic to the European Union as a new opportunity to use in the direction of
influencing the peace process. Others have mentioned the ‘Gambari 8 of July’ agreement
between the two Cypriot leaders.

The External Participants’ Analysis
Motivation of involvement
External participants include non-Cypriots who became involved in the peace process
either as mediators, trainers, experts, unofficial facilitators, or donors. Some became
involved in the peace process as part of their jobs (e.g., US embassy employees, UN
employees, the Fulbright commission, Swiss embassy, etc.). Others who came from an
academic or non-governmental background and were professional facilitators aimed to
empower dialogue processes and/or conflict resolution capacities (e.g., the Cyprus
Consortium, Ben Broome, the Oslo Group, the Harvard Study Group, etc.). All external
parties can be considered highly educated and dedicated to the success of the peace
process on the island.
They had a shared optimism about the will in the people and the possibilities for coming
together, as reflected in such comments as “people wanted to do something, but they
didn’t know what.” Those who supported the civil society conflict resolution work
believed that the bi-communal workshops “were aimed at putting pressure on a system
with no safety valves, by bringing people together at the valve that existed, they aimed at

35

bending the ruling elites, ” and that “anything bringing people together had to be
supported.”
Positive Elements
External participants identified a number of positive elements, particularly with regard to
the people involved in the peace process and to the bi-communal meetings and
workshops. They saw that “people’s perceptions shifted from they are actively evil to
they are people” because of the conflict resolution work, and that myths were debunked.
There were powerful memories of the “excitement” of Greek and Turkish Cypriots
coming together and the opportunities to initiate “more daring projects.” The most
positive aspects for many of the third parties were associated with the work with the
youth of both communities. One UN official who resided on the island for several years
commented that “the most positive bi-communal efforts were between youth. Young
people do not have such deeply ingrained prejudices, and are further away from 1975.” A
non-governmental conflict resolution trainer-facilitator similarly commented that “the
work with educators and youth was some of the more impactful work.”
Many were encouraged, yet pragmatic about the opening of the crossings. To most, the
easing of travel restrictions “did not achieve what had been hoped for” and “it was a
mistake to think that this would lead to a solution and to greater cooperation”.
Obstacles
The main challenges these third parties believed the bi-communal movement faced was
its reach and its effectiveness within the two communities. There was a group of people
who were interested in contacts with the other side and accepted them as useful, but there
was a huge majority who thought otherwise and were not interested. There were “people
old enough to remember mixed villages,” who had had “positive experiences,” and who
knew that the propaganda that the two communities could not live together was “crap”.
The bi-communal movement touched something that people wanted, but it could not turn
that into concrete support.
The bi-communalists were a “small, hard-core group,” a “cottage industry,” as one UN
official put it, noting also that “there was a well-orchestrated campaign against people
engaging in bi-communal work.” Other third party actors agreed that the bi-communal
movement faced tough odds because they were not representative of the population, and
“they, and only they, had links [to the other side].” The groups were seen as working with
themselves, but not talking with the people while the rest of the population worked on the
stereotypes of the past. “Had the groups been more aware of what was going on when the
government was running anti-Annan Plan campaigns, civil society could have been used
more effectively.” As one interviewee expressed, “they could have been preparing people
for compromise, but they did not take the debate to the people.” This in part may have
been because they hadn’t “cohered around a solution; they hadn’t worked it out for
themselves.” Several donor and UN representatives believed that “unless society finds a
way of energizing civil society to get involved in the debate, it will be difficult to make
progress and civil society will be used as it was before.” The question was “how to make
this happen in civil society.” The UNDP program now thus aims to strengthen civil

36

society, to build up an independent civil society that will stand up for each other, whether
on bi-communal or social issues.
The bi-communal movement’s failure to reach out to the public was not the only obstacle
identified by external participants. All noted that neither leadership prepared the people
for compromise. Both sides focused on what they could sell politically because the idea
of compromise was difficult. For most of the past 30 years, “others were always to
blame.” The parties felt they had “no obligation to cede anything;” since the other side
was to blame, “they should make concessions, not us.” Additionally, some interviewees
noted that “there was no self-interest on the Greek side, and there was no sense of a moral
obligation to compromise in the negotiations.”
Propaganda was also driving the way people thought and acted. The media and most
politicians used their power to “actively dissuade the public” by the use of “misleading”
techniques that led many people, for example, to believe “their side committed no
atrocities against the other.” The language used on each side was considered
confrontational and zero-sum to the third parties who observed its exploitation and use:
“there is never the language of reconciliation; it is always hard-line.” The use of
propaganda was not exclusive to the media, but rather permeated the whole society,
through the role of education and the youth. As a UN official with experience with the
civil society and official peace processes reflected, “The education system was an active
contributor to the conflict. When UNDP translated parts of textbooks, we discovered that
even textbooks in math, French and reading were laced with references to refugees, etc”.
Another high-level UN official on the island noted that “more work needs to be done
with youth and universities to leverage the power of youth who on the GC side were the
rejectionists.”
There were substantive obstacles as well, particularly in relation to land and property
issues and the fate of settlers from Turkey. Ownership and return of Greek Cypriot
properties in the North was complicated by the large amount of housing construction on
GC properties in the North. Previous efforts had “not been comprehensive,” a UN staff
person commented. “The idea”, she noted, “was to devise something that would allow
GC to retain their attachment to their ancestral lands and alleviate TC fears of threats to
their security and identity and we tried too late to bring a simplified answer.” She
continued her assessment by saying that, “the process was all confidential, and the UN
didn’t have “hands in the marketing.” This was because of the UN commitment to not
betray confidentiality.
With respect to the issue of the settlers from Turkey (who are not Cypriot), according to
some interviewees, “the North was becoming more and more like a province of
Anatolia.” “There was an outcry in the TC community when there was the proposal to
teach the Koran in schools during the summer holidays,” some noted, and “there has been
an increased building of mosques.” Unfortunately, these last two obstacles are increasing
as time passes without a solution.

37

Finally, a member of the UN mediation team described what he termed as a “linkage
failure” as another obstacle to the peace process. He remarked that he “was unaware of
the groups doing track two dialogue” and “did not see a great deal of impact of the ideas
of the track two processes, perhaps in the confidence-building arena” as they were “not
directly relevant to the processes, even if perhaps to long-term attitudinal change.” UN
staff working on the Annan process was aware of the informal dialogue efforts (like the
Harvard Study Group) going on, and it was “interesting to look at their proceedings.”
The problem as one member of the UN team saw it was that they were “talking to people
that were not necessarily representative of the people who had to vote on the
referendum.” A long-time non-governmental facilitator commented in a similar fashion
on the linkages amongst track two efforts; he was “not sure there were conscious attempts
by third parties” to link their efforts to each other’s or to Track I, not since the “overall
vision that Louise and Diana had for connecting the efforts.” 29 A lot of what happened
was opportunistic. There was an opportunity to do something specific, partly because of
funding (e.g. a different administration came in, they wanted to do something different),
but the movement didn’t do much to connect with what had gone before.
Interestingly, a member of the UN mediation team noted, the decision making/
peacemaking was “conducted in a tight-knit circle and there was not a great deal of
linkage of civil society into that process.” Civil society, he believed, could not be so
effective; it was “difficult” because everything was decided by the President on both
sides. “The only issue on the island is Cyprus, and the traditions of leadership on Cyprus
are personality-centred. So everything in peacemaking was at the top.” Still, another UN
official thought, “marketing the solution within the constraints of a highly confidential
process would need to be thought of. The UN and pro-settlement groups didn’t
communicate in the way that the OXI [‘NO’] campaign did.” This was apparent in the
lead-up to the referendum, “when there was an active campaign against the Plan” that
was well-orchestrated, “including an association back to W.W.II “OXI” Day, when
Greeks in Greece refused (said ‘NO’) to collaborate with the fascists. The message was
that you have to say ‘no’ again, and not give in on rights”. Subsequently, the anti-Annan
Plan political forces were able to overpower civil society in swaying the referendum vote.
Turning Points
According to the to the third party actors, one of the main turning points was the change
in the North with the initiation and effectiveness of the pro-settlement rallies. It reflected
the “maturation of the next generation of leadership, many of whom had been through
our program” some trainers said. The rallies opened the door for people to express their
desire for something different. TCs who took on the cause for bi-communalism and a yes
to the Annan Plan were ready to be hated, as evidenced by the fact that “they had eggs
thrown at them; they were booed at public meetings.” They were, as one UN official
noted, “committed to their cause, knowing it would be a long-term process.” Although
pro-settlement TC forces were helped by TC isolation and the prospect of EU accession
(“there was greater need for change in the North,” as one person noted), they also had a
29

Louise Diamond and Diana Chigas were directors of the Cyprus Consortium, which provided much of
the initial conflict resolution training and training of trainers sponsored by the Cyprus Fulbright
Commission in the early-mid 1990s.

38

heavy obstacle in Denktash and needed to have a show of overwhelming popular support
to overcome this. People were scared of Denktash and his apparatus, but they also
believed that “people are on our side but making public that they are pro-Denktash.” In
other words, in many interviewees’ opinion, bi-communalism had more support than it
appeared.
Also mentioned were the social impacts of the trainings as a number of people in the
North who went through the program took the learning seriously. They applied it in their
organizations and brought it into the public discourse when appropriate. People in the
programs, especially key people, went on television following each major training event
to broadcast to the public what they had experienced. In that way they built a base of new
ideas in the society. The ideas in the North, when the time came, “weren’t new, they
weren’t foreign.” People heard about experiences of people they trusted. On the GC side,
by contrast, the system was bigger and less concentrated than in the North (where
intellectual capital of the society is close together).
Moreover, in the South, religion had “a braking effect.” Because in GC society there is a
natural inclination or tendency to listen to the clergy, the inability to communicate
effectively with or coordinate any activities with the church hierarchy or even with the
church going part of the community may have been a missed opportunity. One trainerfacilitator commented that “the Church was not addressed, and one can’t do it in a bicommunal setting, and it isn’t clear what one should do with the Church.”
In addition, one diplomat expressed the view that GC politicians and citizens do not
know much about life in the North. “They do not know about politics, the difficulties
they are having, what the leadership is doing, and the role of Talat is surely
misunderstood.” Had there been efforts to honestly evaluate and present accurate
information about what was happening in the North to the GC community, then a
possibility for greater understanding might have occurred. Of course, there are those who
profit from the TC, situation according to some, “and they are those connected to Turkey
who do not want her to enter the EU, and there are those who are suspicious of all
foreigners and consider them threats because they deviate from the daily rhetoric.”
Finally, work with youth and educators can also be considered to be turning points. A
long-time non-governmental facilitator on Cyprus thought that the Youth Leaders project
(young political leaders) which brought young political leaders from the entire political
spectrum – right to left – was a turning point because they “would not otherwise have
gone to a conflict resolution workshop.” This project provided an impetus for them to
“get together to talk.” Some things came out of this turning point such as when the GC
AKEL youth insisted that the “TC should come to Israeli event when they were invited.”
The third party actors expressed a consensus that the youth and next generations have a
great potential to contribute to the possibility of a solution as witnessed by their mostly
positive interactions.

39

CONVERGENCE AND DIVERGENCE: ANALYZING INTERVIEW RESULTS FOR
CUMULATIVE IMPACT
The following section analyzes the interviews and attempts to draw out themes regarding
the cumulative effects of peacebuilding initiatives in relation to the overall factors
affecting the process leading up to the referenda on the Annan Plan on both sides, a major
turning point in the conflict for both sides. Two methods were used: first, a content
analysis in which recurring words and phrases from the interview transcripts were
analysed, and second, an analysis of the main themes and divergences both within and
between Greek Cypriots, Turkish Cypriots and internationals.
The messages and themes from the interviews were extracted from the recurring words
and phrases by looking not only at the number of recurrences, but also the number of
interviewees stressing these words and phrases.
Analysis of recurring words and phrases from 40 interviews (13 TC, 16 GC, 11 International)
- “Annan Plan” was mentioned 94 times by 13 TC interviewees out of 13, as against 25 times by 12
interviewees out of 17 GCs and 16 times by 4 international interviewees out of 4.
-

“Referendum” was used 36 times by 9 TCs, 26 times by 13 GCs not by any internationals.

-

“Crossing/Opening of check points” was used 47 times by 13 TCs, 15 times by 7 GCs and 6 times by 4
internationals

-

The word “settlement” and “agreement” were used 48 times and 32 times by 6 and 5 TC interviewees
respectively but these phrases were not used by GC interviewees at all.

-

The word “European Union” is used 29 times by 11 GC interviewees. However the TC interviewees did
not refer to EU at all and was used 11 times by WHOM??

-

Civil Society engagement was mentioned even once by neither the GC nor the TC interviewees but was
mentioned by the international interviewees 10 times by 4 people.

-

The main phrase used by all sides 25 times by 5 TC, 31 times by 8 GC, and 9 times by 5 international
interviewees is “political leadership”.

-

The word “equality” was used by 3 TCs about 12 times and not by any GCs or other international third
party interviewees.

-

Economics as a reason behind yes and no votes of were also mentioned by both sides 15 times by 4 TC
and 6 times by 6 GC

-

Media influenced by political leadership is mentioned 9 times by 6 TCs and 9 time s by 5 GCs.

-

Nationalism as an obstacle is mentioned 11 times by 5 GCs and 5 times by 4 TCs

-

Need for Dialogue is repeated 10 times by 3 TCs and 10 times by 3 GCs

-

The word Regime was used 9 times by 5 TCs. And the word military referring to the regime in the North
was used 6 times by 4 GCs.

40

It is very obvious from this analysis that Annan Plan-Referendum and Opening of Checkpoints was a major turning point for the conflict resolution and peace process. Since the
referendum and the disappointing result, however, the TCs have been more preoccupied
with the issue of isolation (mentioned by 3 TCs 7 times and not even once by others) as
well as keeping the “settlement-agreement” notion in their agenda, and the GCs with
matters relating to European Union and “occupation by Turkish troops” (mentioned by 4
GCs 4times and not even once by others). It is also evident that the TCs were sensitive
about the concept of “equality,” but there was no evidence of this sensitivity from the
GCs or third parties.
GCs were more concerned with foreigner interference and foreign interests (7 GCs
stressed this 7 times but not one TC or third party interviewees mentioned it).
Both TCs and GCs are seeing the political leadership as the major factor in the process,
and civil society engagement is only seen by the international players to have a role in the
reconciliation process. This has in fact been one of the major issues of discussion in
recent years by international organizations such as the UN and the EU encouraging the
strengthening of civil society on both sides of the Green Line. It is evident that these
efforts fall short of supporting civil society to be a major player, especially in the GC
community.
Economics is also seen by both sides as a hidden agenda behind the “yes” and “no” votes
of the sides. The interviewees are implying that the TCs said “yes” to the UN plan mainly
for economic reasons, while the GCs said “no” because they were scared to lose their
privileged position of having a good economy and a relatively rich society. Any new
initiative should also take this into account.
Media is seen by both sides as being under the influence of political leadership and a
major instrument to block or unblock the reconciliation process. Nationalism is also seen
as a reality prevailing in both communities and blocking peace. The TCs see the South as
having many of prejudices and taboos towards the other. The regime and the presence of
military in the North are also seen as an obstacle by both TCs and the GCs.
Overall we notice that all three groups of interviewees saw the value and contribution of
peacebuilding process in Cyprus as very significant to the overall peace process despite
its limitations. This section reviews those perceptions of each of the interviewee group.

Greek Cypriots: Similarities and Differences in Analysis of Failure of
the Annan Plan
Upon analysis of the answers given by the GC interviewees to the questions posed, four
themes are consistently referred to as having great significance for the peacebuilding
process: leadership during the peacebuilding process, the European Union accession
process, the introduction and explanation of the Annan plan, and the meaning of change
in the GC political scene after the referendum’s failure.

41

Leadership
GCs attribute failure to the influence of several actors on the peace process: international
powers, internal political authorities, non-government organisations (NGOs), and the
Autonomous Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus (‘the church’).
International Powers
In the unique case of Cyprus, international powers – Turkey, Greece and other
international actors such as the United States, the European Union, and the United
Nations – were seen by some of the GC interviewees as powerful forces who guide the
direction of the Cyprus problem in terms of their own interests rather than providing
coherent, stable leadership and guidance to address the issues and needs of Cypriots. Due
to the complexity of the desires of these international government actors and their
changing geopolitical agendas, there was a perception and fear that their leadership
would have negative consequences or produce an unfair resolution or settlement. The
involvement of funds from outside sources was also viewed with suspicion. One
interviewee captured the overall feeling toward the international forces involved when he
said, “The hegemonic powers in region will always affect Cyprus.” Despite mistrust of
the overall direction the international leadership had provided, the interviewees
recognised their influence and permanence in Cyprus. One interviewee added, “Not one
good idea has come from Cypriots – there have been no constructive proposals.” It
remains a luxury to blame and accuse those who tried to act.
Internal Political Authorities
The internal leadership based on the island has been greatly influenced by these
international forces, yet they have been the most dominant players in the Cyprus
negotiations with the power to support or prevent a solution. The leadership on the island
was perceived by the GC interviewees as mostly ineffective at best, and at worst,
obstructive. As one peace activist surmised, “There is an intense need for people to deal
with the truth, but very few people actually address these issues and nobody in the
leadership does so. This discourse is not coming from the leadership and it should.”
Another interviewee stated, “If the leadership and media continue with the same
messages, nothing will change. As long as the leadership does not change, nothing will
change.” It is clear that the some of the GC interviewees blame many of the difficulties
encountered in the peacebuilding process on the internal leadership’s priorities and
conduct. As one interviewee said, “Recent surveys have highlighted a very disturbing
trend in that GCs now see TCs no longer as compatriots, but rather as foreigners to land
which is not rightfully theirs. This is cultivated from the people who control political
life.” They desired their leaders to behave respectably, be honest in their
communications with the public and produce positive results; most were disappointed in
the leadership that was provided.
The Papadopoulos administration took special blame from pro-settlement interviewees.
“Papadopoulos worked on people’s fears…he could have been a better negotiator but he
stuck to his opinions related to his personal agenda.” At the same time, many
interviewees noted that GCs did not understand the dynamics in the North. The fact that
TC authorities were led for so many years by the Denktash regime persuaded many to

42

believe that the change in that leadership to Talat could provide some movement, but lack
of familiarity and the North’s relationship to Turkey led GCs to receive his leadership
sceptically. As one interviewee said, “The role of Talat is sorely misunderstood. Even
when he had extreme influence in the TC community the GCs severely ridiculed him,
thus he lost his influence and could not deliver. Stating that Talat is like Denktash is an
incredible insult.” Misconceptions, a lack of respect for the other side’s leadership, and
an unwillingness to learn about Talat led to a failure to appreciate the gravity of the
opportunity for rapprochement that Talat’s rise to power offered all involved.
Non-governmental Organisations
Looking to leadership in the area of NGOs and civil society organizations, there were
many similarities in the responses from the GC interviewees mainly because there was
agreement about the general state of their operations. One GC interviewee said, “Civil
society is very fragile in southern Cyprus meaning that the NGOs that do exist are usually
attached to a political party or the church. NGOs are usually very small, not connected
and do not last long”. Another interviewee pointed out that “NGOs have a lack of
institutionalisation and difficulty of language. Their activities need legitimisation by the
political leaders and need to be discussed in the broader society”. “[G]aps in NGO
efforts” and failures were seen to be “due to lack of resources and inability of
mobilisation.” While NGO efforts and roles in the peace process were at the forefront of
the overall movement towards exploring a solution, they were seen as mostly ineffective
when it came to actually producing influence over the process, because their power was
loosely defined, scattered and held no real permanence. Cypriot NGOs were especially
instrumental in the initial steps of rapprochement in the early stages of the peacebuilding
process, but as the movement grew their influence was seized, controlled or negated by
political parties and other powerful forces. However, it is important to note that the GC
interviewees generally approved of their leadership in the early stages of the process and
thought it provided a framework for dialogue and discussion and a psychological boost to
people. As one GC interviewee commented, “there was a need for the NGOs, and there
will continue to be a need for civil society engagement, research on issues of importance
to the peace process and distribution of information by a non-governmental source.”
NGOs were at once valued for their contributions to the peacebuilding process and
leadership on important interpersonal issues. However, their inability to move this
momentum forward was recognised as an inability to lead effectively. These burgeoning
organisations who were engaged in a complex situation with more powerful forces who
had a longer experience in getting their objectives across did not have the capacity to
bring about complete .
Autonomous Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus
To a lesser extent, but mentioned frequently was another non-governmental leadership
role that yielded its power and influence in the peacebuilding process. This position was
occupied by the Autonomous Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus itself. It was seen as so
unshakable in its doctrine that it was slow to react to rapidly changing social and political
conditions. One GC interviewee expressed that, “the role of the church has been
catastrophic; they do not have the right attitude towards tolerance and reconciliation.” As
the largest land owner on the island and the wealthiest institution, the church used its

43

dominance to sway people away from the peacebuilding process and into a position of
isolation and fear. Parishioners were persuaded by the force of guilt and threat of
condemnation, even being told by church leaders that a “yes” vote equalled eternal
damnation in hell. All of the GC interviewees who mentioned the church held similar
negative views of the leadership role the church chose to pursue.
Overall, the GC interviewees were similarly sceptical of the leadership provided to them
on all levels; by international leaders with their own agendas, their internal political
leadership with their staunch nationalism, the incapacity of NGOs to influence processes
and the church’s negative influence toward reconciliation. All of the influences combined
to add to the chaos and did not encourage an atmosphere conducive to finding a solution
best for all parties. True leadership comes from the wisdom of the people and is promoted
by its leaders to best serve the needs of the country and in this one finds pieces of justice
for all.
The Influence of the European Union Accession Process
Much emphasis was placed on the influence of the EU’s 1999 Helsinki decision, which
paved the way to allow southern Cyprus into the EU without a solution to the Cyprus
problem and gave Turkey a process for accession negotiations. Many GC interviewees
believed a bona fide solution was not pursued on their part because there was no real
obstacle for their prospect of EU membership. One GC interviewee lamented “They
should have squeezed the GCs and made it a requirement for accession to the EU to
reunite the island.” Another explained, “The accession process was a huge missed
opportunity which undermined the solution and going together into the EU, the great
chance was joining the EU and joining together – it was the moment for a solution.”
Within the GC community the desire to join the EU was driven in part by the belief that
EU membership would provide leverage for their side and strengthen their chances of
gaining an edge in the negotiations of the Cyprus problem. As one GC stated, “People
(GCs) expected that after we get into the EU certain amendments would be made so as to
get rid of certain negative elements and then will move forward toward a solution.” This
view was shared by the Papadopoulos administration and was a manipulation of the spirit
of the EU accession process; instead of working issues out in a good faith manner with
fairness for all, the GCs hoped to gain an advantage through their EU membership to
push their agenda and not to enter fairly into an agreement with their TC compatriots.
As a result, there was no incentive for the GCs to seriously entertain how EU accession
could help achieve a solution and there was certainly no leadership from within the GC
political structure to pursue this objective.
The GC interviewees held differing views of the TC agenda regarding EU membership.
Some thought TCs were motivated to vote for reunification in order to obtain the benefits
of EU membership related to recognition and economic growth. One GC stated, “The EU
factor was viewed by the TCs in economic terms, and it was imposed by the GCs on
them.” Others saw the TCs as genuinely interested in EU membership as a vehicle to
achieve a solution to the Cyprus problem. As one GC interviewee stated: “the TCs voted
‘yes’ because of their desire to get into the EU as a reunited island.” Of course, this issue
could not be separated from the larger geo-political picture, as exemplified by the

44

statement from one GC: “The EU was significant especially for the TCs because they saw
it as a big possibility and an important force, but also as a negative aspect because the EU
can use Cyprus as a scapegoat to keep Turkey out.” Another GC interviewee stated, “The
goal was to advance Turkey in its relations with Europe and the US. It was very
political.” On a deeper level, this was a justification for GCs rejecting the plan in hopes
of obtaining more gain once inside the EU apparatus. One GC interviewee said, “For us,
rejecting the Annan Plan was seen as a way to delay a settlement so that we could
renegotiate certain aspects of the plan later.” When citizens are voting on issues that will
shape their future for generations to come as well as settling long-term issues, they need
the reasons to be clear and easily defined, not an undue burden to be dismissed and
settled later.
Introduction and Dissemination of the Annan Plan
Hardly any one subject could at once contain similar and different viewpoints as the
controversial Annan Plan. There was a general consensus that it was doomed from the
start because even though it was worked on by GC and TC politicians, it was also crafted
with the assistance of the international community, leading many GCs to believe it
compromised Hellenism for the interests of geo-political interests, especially those of
Turkey. One GC interviewee declared, “Had the TC themselves produced the Annan
Plan, I would have accepted it; my ‘no’ vote was to the drafters of the plan not to the TC
community.” Another GC interviewee said, “Some of the details of the Annan Plan were
despicable such as the issues of security and property and the vertical line drawn around
the sea coast; there was a violation of rights.” Even those GCs who desired a solution and
were most intimately involved in the peacebuilding process felt certain issues the plan
addressed were a bit unfair.
Additional similarities emerged from many of the GC interviewees who expressed that
the public announcement, dissemination of the information and handling of the plan
needed to be presented with more honesty and transparency. One GC interviewee
reflected the views of many others in stating, “The plan was not explained properly and
no criteria were put to approach it, and there was no criterion set for the evolution of the
plan into something better.” Another GC interviewee added, “Instead of finding out the
positive elements of the plan like the TCs, the GCs were persuaded into a perception of
loss and nothing to gain.” For many, “The ‘no’ vote was very sentimental, based on
economic considerations and easy slogans, patriotism and in general, afraid of change.”
All of these sentiments were similar in their understanding that the GCs had been unable
to approach the plan in a spirit of reconciliation or pragmatism because of the
manipulation of their emotions by GC political machinery. The real tragedy is that people
made their decisions based on the wrong information.
Change in the Greek Cypriot Political Scene
Almost unanimously, the GC interviewees spoke about the effects that a change in the
GC political structure in 2008 would mean to the peacebuilding process. No matter the
political affiliation of the GC interviewees, almost all recognised that the only way
forward to a solution was a change of government. If this change did not occur in the next
election cycle, partition would be the future of Cyprus, as suggested in these statements

45

reflecting the sentiments of most GC interviewees: “Currently there are presidential
candidates who provide hope that would come after a Papadopoulos loss; his loss will be
good to rekindle hope and optimism,” “If Papadopoulos is chosen again we shall stay
divided,” and “This is our last chance; we need the political situation to change to make
any impact”.

Turkish Cypriots: Similarities and Differences in Perceptions of
Factors for Success in the North vs. Failure in the South
Three main areas emerged from the analysis of the answers given by the TC interviewees
to the questions posed: the Annan Plan and the role of the media, the role and influence
of internal politics during the peacebuilding process, and what a conflict settlement
would look like. In this section these main areas are explored for their similarities and
differences of meaning to the TC interviewees.
Annan Plan and the Media
Many of the TC interviewees emphasised the influence of the different media coverage
and public discussion each community received about the Plan on the two sides of the
island. From their perspective, the Annan Plan was openly discussed among the TC
community. Discussions in the broadcast and print media gave a comprehensive picture
of the plan for all TCs to adequately judge for themselves the merit of the proposal. As
one interviewee said, “It was discussed publicly, on TV, everywhere; everybody knew
what it was about.” Television played an especially crucial role in the North as stations
hosted debates and discussions with pro- and anti-Annan Plan people and allowed for the
discussion to get into detailed exchanges. The media in the North was widely considered
a model of effective communication during this time. Many of the TC interviewees credit
this transparency and open public debate to the plan’s success in the TC community.
Conversely, many TC interviewees claimed that their Greek Cypriot counterparts did not
have the chance to receive sufficient and detailed information about the Annan plan. One
interviewee believed that in the GC community, “many rumours had been spread and the
people voted in line with these rumours.” “The Greek Cypriots were not informed about
the Annan Plan. Giving information about the Annan Plan was banned on television and
in the press,” said one TC interviewee. This lack of a common discussion forum was
mentioned as a reason for the insufficient and imbalanced information leading to the
failure of the plan’s passage in the South.
Media was not entirely to blame. One of the TC interviewees displayed his shock at how
the situation unfolded when he said, “It is unbelievable that the two communities haven’t
sat down to discuss the Annan Plan.” The fact that no bi-communal public discussion
took place was seen as a grave disservice to the people and democracy itself and one of
the main reasons the possibility of the plan’s ratification was drastically reduced.

46

Role and influence of politics
TC interviewees generally agreed about the role of the GC political leadership during the
peacebuilding process: that the GC political establishment did not allow for or partake in
valuable and transparent discussions about the Annan Plan. The TC interviewees agreed
that there was a concerted effort from the highest levels of the GC establishment to
ensure the Annan Plan’s failure. One interviewee expressed, “Papadopoulos orchestrated
the OXI (NO) campaign, and this killed the peace process.” The general feeling was that
from the very highest levels of the internal GC political structure on the island, there was
an active crusade to prevent reconciliation. Some interviewees claimed the GC political
leadership deliberately misled their own people with disinformation in order to influence
a ‘no’ vote. Not all the criticism was levelled at the government. Some of the blame was
specifically prescribed to traditionally sympathetic sections of the GC political
machinery, such as the communist party AKEL. As one interviewee said, “Had AKEL
promoted a yes-vote, the GC result would have been more positive and the impression on
the international community would be more positive.” This caused a lot of pain and strife
within the TC community, as now it felt completely isolated even by the community’s
own compatriots.
Still, there were differences in opinion among the TC interviewees regarding the reasons
GCs voted “no” to the Annan Plan. Some TCs believed that the political incentives for
TC and GC to ratify the plan were just too far apart. One interviewee said “For the TC
any political solution would be better than the existing situation,” but, as another stated,
“since the GC would be part of the EU political system anyway, regardless of their vote
on the Annan Plan, they had little incentive to approve plan to help the TC join the same
structure.” Still other TCs pointed out that there were different political realities on the
TC and GC sides. He said, “The TC thought their problems would be solved if they voted
in favour of plan and the GC did not face these problems, so this provided very little
enticement to agree on the Annan Plan.” This incentive based political reasoning was
separate from the GC leadership’s role in their non-support of the plan, but played a
major role in the failure of the plan’s confirmation. There were also some allusions to
other reasoning’s about the plan’s failure such as not enough political protections allotted
to the TCs and that there was not an effective enough leadership on the TC side that
could appeal to the GCs politically as a leader and someone they could trust.
Settlement/ Agreement
When asked what a settlement would look like, the TC interviewees expressed many
things in common. The overall idea was that the TCs could not be the only ones asked to
give in because the peace agreement cannot be made with efforts of only one side. As one
interviewee said, “Both communities should have a clear and equal desire for a lasting
peace agreement.” It was the lack of clarity from both sides that would eventually doom
any agreement.
The TC interviewees also had some reservations about the international powers and their
role in the settlement and peacebuilding process. They felt that as a whole the United
States, the EU and Turkey all secretly supported non-settlement probably do to with geopolitical goals unbeknownst the TCs themselves. This was a bit surprising because the

47

TCs trusted these powers and showed their faith by actively supporting a settlement.
There was confusion about the role of the US activities in particular, since the US was
promoting bi-communal activities but also supporting the GC state, and by that action
was actually hindering any possibility of a settlement process. As far as Turkey was
concerned, the TC interviewees believed that Turkey had postponed the idea of a
settlement until after its accession to EU, perhaps aiming to achieve a settlement in
Cyprus and EU membership simultaneously. Most TCs thought an agreement would have
been possible had these two been put together. Additionally, the future prospects of any
settlement became more difficult once the South was part of EU. To the TCs, this was
another example of there not being true and valued equality between the two sides by the
international powers.
The differences in viewpoints from the TC interviewees about a settlement have to do
with the fact there is actually an absence of violence, or a peace deal, but the tangible
agreements about co-existing are missing. In order to achieve a settlement, political
issues needed to be undertaken directly and worked out in a way that retained the idea of
peace in the background by focusing on the concrete measures a settlement agreement
would ensure. Furthermore, TC interviewees felt that sharing geography and culture was
not enough for a settlement; they needed validation and protection of their political rights
under a recognised system. One TC interviewee said, “A settlement is when the two
communities have established good neighbourly relations, without nationalism and
fanaticism.” It is the combination of all these ideas and viewpoints that would have
yielded a true settlement through the peacebuilding process for the TC interviewees.

International Interviewees: Similarities and Differences in Analyses of
Impacts of Peacebuilding
Analysis of the answers given by the International interviewees revealed three main
areas: the Annan plan, civil society engagement and the achievements of the bicommunal activities during the peacebuilding process. In this section these main areas are
explored for their similarities and differences of meaning to the international
interviewees.
The Annan Plan: Outreach and Mobilization
The international interviewees held similar views about the Annan plan in the sense that
they saw its failure as a by-product of the way Cypriot politics are constructed, the
restrictions and constraints of a highly confidential process that had to be followed by the
international players, and the differences of organisation within the two communities.
With regards to the Cypriot political situation, the responses identified the structure of the
political organisations as important. One interviewee said, “It is the way Cyprus does
politics; along party lines, different groups, no planning, not organising around the Plan,
at least not early enough.” Another spoke about the power base in Cypriot politics when
she said, “We just couldn’t match the organisation and resources of the ‘no’ campaign.”
Politics in Cyprus, as in most places, is a dynamic process, but the strength of the politics
of the past seems especially powerful in this situation. In this case it was difficult for the

48

participants in the peacebuilding process to challenge the status-quo and form strong
enough alliances to prevail or persuade people of their convictions.
There was a general understanding among the interviewees that the international
community, for all their perceived power and influence, were actually not able to actively
and effectively campaign or utilise all their resources once the Annan Plan was released
for public comment and scrutiny, for fear that any effort to intervene in the process would
be seen as interference in the internal affairs of a political process. As a UN official
noted, “Reaching out to the communities and the media was a job for the [political]
leadership, not the UN.”
Some of the international interviewees attributed the failure of the Annan Plan to the
inability of the peacebuilding and bi-communal forces to effectively message to their
communities, in the South in particular, as contrasted with the North, where they
perceived greater organisation, commitment, and ultimately, effectiveness. As one
interviewee said about the attitudes of the TC side, “They felt like this was it. They were
never going to have this opportunity again.” “They walked the walk. Campaigners went
to the villages, the town halls, etc. They did this for a long time, a couple of years, and
they were not daunted by setbacks.” Conversely, in the GC community, “[t]here were a
lot of concerned people who talked about what they should do, but not so much action”.
Another international interviewee remarked, “The GCs were not in touch enough with
what was going on in the North. They had few contacts relative to what they had before
and didn’t get out and work with people.” The differences in the styles of how the two
communities chose to address their fellow citizens were reflected in the outcome of the
judgements passed on the Annan Plan. According to the international interviewees, in the
North the campaign was able to capture the people and bring about a tangible change,
whereas in the South the GCs in the peacebuilding process failed to communicate
effectively enough to change hearts and minds, in part because they were not
representative of the opinions of the overall population.
A difference in opinion amongst the international interviewees came in the perception of
the aforementioned outreach efforts. Not all the international interviewees gave credence
to the argument about organisation and persuasion abilities. The length of the decades’
long dispute had in their opinion so adversely affected the people emotionally and
mentally and that each side was so entrenched that it could not make concessions. As one
person commented, “It was not all the fault of organisation, most of it had to do with
what each side could sell politically.”
Civil Society Engagement
The role that civil society engagement played in the peacebuilding process from the
viewpoint of the international interviewees was very useful and to an extent successful in
ways not measured by the achievement of a comprehensive solution to the Cyprus
problem. To most of the international interviewees, the people involved in bi-communal
activities were pioneers who deliberately put themselves at risk to exercise their right of
political defiance.

49

The predominant theme from the perspective of the international interviewees regarding
the achievements of the bi-communal activities during the peacebuilding process in
Cyprus was the idea of people coming together and doing something to subvert the
dominant political paradigm, to have their voices heard and to bridge the differences in
the cross community dynamic. Regardless of the fact that at the beginning the people
who chose to become involved in this process did not know what exactly they wanted to
do or how to achieve it, the desire was there. That was an impressive ideal to which the
international interviewees were attracted and a place where they could be instrumental in
providing aid and guidance.
The courage and persistence of the civil society actors to continue their work within the
peacebuilding process, even when faced with daunting odds, impressed many from the
international community involved in the process. One interviewee said, “You have to
give credit to these individuals, they just keep at it.” Another said, “The engagement from
civil society was a movement that touched what people wanted.” This type of inspiration
led to a “horizontal spread” in society. “The ideas spread into different layers of society,
mostly the intelligentsia, management and universities; also some local governments like
the municipality in Pyla.” The overall impression was that the engagement of civil
society in the peacebuilding process was an inspiration to the international interviewees
even for all its shortcomings because it was led by people who had been involved for
years in preparing for an eventual breakthrough to the stalemate. These actions have led
to the present day financial support from the international organisations for activities to
strengthen civil society, whether on bi-communal or social issues.
The achievements of the bi-communal activities
The bi-communal activities encouraged the idea that major achievements could be
produced. One interviewee said. “A number of people took the learning seriously. They
applied it in their organisations and brought it into the public discourse when appropriate.
In that way they built new ideas into society.” This reflected the maturation of the
peacebuilding process. From this perspective it seems that the momentum was generated
to include all Cypriots and make inroads to an all inclusive monumental breakthrough
that would reach all Cypriots.
Yet from this space of nothing came the opportunities to actually produce and do
something meaningful and to attract others to the developing movement. The difference
in the interviewees’ perceptions was in the effectiveness of this group to communicate on
a broader level. One international observer commented: “They didn’t convene people; we
noticed it, commented on it, but they did nothing about it.” Another said, “they were not
thinking as a movement; they were thinking as little groups or individual groups. They
did not explore all avenues for influence.” It is evident from these comments that the
internationals recognised and were hopeful about the potential of the bi-communal
peacebuilding activities, but saw limitations in their failure to link to the macro level
especially in the GC community, and to develop a strong bi-communal political
movement.

50

The main criticism of the civil society efforts was that the people involved in the
peacebuilding process did not focus their efforts clearly enough. Weaknesses identified
by international interviewees included:
- Lack of representativity: bi-communal activists “were talking to people that were
not necessarily representative of the people who had to vote on the referendum.”
- Lack of linkages: “Linkages were weak,” on interviewee commented. “People
came in and tried to make it work in a collaborative way, but often it was not
reciprocated.”
- Lack of vision and common understanding of the situation: One interviewee said,
“It wasn’t clear; they had no common vision or common understanding of the
situation they faced.” This may have come from the fact that the separation meant
that the participants did not know each other well. “They had confusing notions
about what peacebuilding actually meant; they had different conceptions of peace
itself.” Additionally, none of the people involved had an idea about what
difficulties the people in the other community faced. As one interviewee stated,
“They did not have a good sense of what it took to engage in peacebuilding on the
other side.”
- Missed opportunities, including the failure to respond to the trauma of the
crossings opening that affected both communities. Civil society should have been
positioned to help this, but failed to deal with it effectively.
Some of the international interviewees wondered if all the effort put forth was too much
of a cost for not enough of a return. One interviewee said, “It cracked. It depleted
people’s life force, energy and there was no money; there were also no tangible results”.

CONCLUDING REMARKS AND REFLECTIONS
The efforts to find a mutually acceptable solution to the Cyprus problem historically have
been confined to negotiations between the leadership of two communities with Turkey,
Greece and Great Britain (the three guarantor powers), and increasingly the US in the
background. It is therefore not surprising that the interviewees did not emphasise the role
of civil society in the process until the civil society-initiated mass movement in the TC
community to support the Annan Plan.
Yet, from the previous analysis it is clear that a great deal of peacebuilding work (training
conflict resolution workshops, interactive problem-solving workshops, communication
workshops, bi-communal projects, meetings, contacts, visits, etc.) did take place in
Cyprus over the last two decades. The question is what impact these peacebuilding
activities had on the bigger peace process and what linkages existed between macro and
micro levels. It is clear that these peacebuilding activities impacted each Cypriot
community differently and led to different outcomes. Why? The process of mass
mobilization in the TC community in the early 2000s deserves a closer look, in contrast
to the GC experience.

51

A first observation concerns the linkages between civil society and official peacebuilding
and peacemaking efforts. When one looks at the history of bi-communal activities, it is
not surprising that their intensity were correlated with the official peace negotiations at
the so called “track one” level. The very first systematic conflict resolution group started
in 1985 at the initiative of Professor Leonard Doob in 1985, during the time when the
then Secretary General of the UN Perez De Cuellar put the first comprehensive peace
plan together and was very close to get the consent of the two sides. The second series of
workshops of ‘bi-communal’ peace activists meeting by the facilitation efforts of Louise
Diamond and Diana Chigas came at a time in the early – mid 1990s. At that time there
was a serious official attempt to get the two sides’ leaderships agree on “set of ideas”
and “Confidence Building measures” presented by UN Secretary General Boutros
Boutros Ghali and once again the two sides came very close to an agreement. The
intensity of these activities continued with mushrooming groups facilitated by various
foreign academic experts such as Benjamin Broome and Marco Turk sponsored by the
US-funded Cyprus Fulbright Commission and by other international organizations, such
as PRIO of Norway.
The critical mass of the TC peace movement came at a time when the UN was
developing the most comprehensive peace plan in Cyprus’ history, with support and
leverage from the US government, the UK government and the EU. This was a time of
positive developments in the external environment: Greek-Turkish rapprochement
initiated by George Papandreou and Ismail Cem in the 1990s; a change of government in
Turkey and intensified efforts of the new Turkish Government under the leadership of
Recep Tayyip Erdogan to pave the way for the start of EU accession negotiations with
Turkey; and the rapidly approaching date for EU accession for Cyprus. The only
remaining handicap remaining was the Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktash, supported
by the military establishment in Turkey, but not so much by the Turkish government. The
fear of losing the chance to become part of the EU, and the opportunity of having a
Turkish administration open to negotiation despite resistance from Denktash and his
allies in Turkey, were big incentives for the Turkish Cypriots to become radical against
their leadership.
The ideas and efforts of the bi-communalists in the north were only able to further
flourish with these developments at the track one level. The people who were active in
the bi-communal groups in their individual capacity were now active in their civil society
organizations to mobilize the masses. It was not until the small public benefit CSOs were
joined by public sector unions, which had large and strong constituencies such as the
doctors, teachers and the civil servants, and the economically independent and strong
Chamber of Commerce, led by some of these bi-communal peace activists, started to play
a leading role that the movement caught a real momentum. Several mass demonstrations
were organized by platforms formed by these CSOs joining forces with pro-solution
opposition political parties.
In the GC community, the situation was almost the opposite. Resting comfortable with
the intransigence of the TC leadership, neither the civil society across nor the opposition
pro-solution political parties organized to develop a critical mass of the peace movement

52

until the referendum, when it was too late for the marginalized bi-communalist peace
activists to generate popular support, except by one of the major political parties. This
party (DISY) had been influenced by one of the leading peace activists (who also
happened to be the daughter of the outgoing president at the time), and had they stayed in
power, perhaps a solution might have been agreed. However, by the time the TC
leadership in the North was toppled and replaced with a more pro-solution leader
supported by a more proactive, pro-solution Turkish mainland government, the leadership
in both GC side and the Greek government had been replaced by a more intransigent GC
government in Cyprus and a more indifferent Greek government in Greece.
In both communities, the majority of participants in the conflict resolution workshops, the
interactive problem-solving and mediation trainings came from the more educated groups
who could speak English. Therefore, although many inspiring ideas were developed by
the peace activist groups to prepare the environment for a solution to the problem, and
some individuals were trained to use some powerful methodologies and skills to
contribute to the peace process, the activities were criticized as engaging mostly elites
and being academically-oriented. The fact that the movement was sponsored by
international organizations and seen to be guided by foreign interests, 30 and that high
language skills and sophistication were needed to attend these “workshops” kept these
activities at the level of intellectual idealists who could benefit from these trainings and
who were bold enough to face the accusations of being “traitors” and “foreign agents”
and become marginalized in their own communities. This limited their impact in the
1990s.
In the TC community, this limiting factor was overcome by the mass mobilization
campaign for the Annan Plan, which reached far beyond the peacebuilding participants.
In the GC community, however, the focus of these activities on producing a mental shift
rather than having a political goal (such as for instance to lead to a bi-communal political
and social movement) restricted the public visibility of these activities. GCs hesitated to
speak out in political terms. Citizens’ level activities were also not linked to Track I,
another shortcoming of the peacebuilding activities, which did not build into the trainings
and workshops reflection on how to go about achieving it.
The institutionalization of all these peacebuilding efforts into a movement with a shared
vision and goals for reunification would have filled in the political gap of an alternative
voice as well a Cypriot presence locally and abroad. Yet the power and control the GC
political parties exert over civil society actions made this difficult. Of course, the civil
society groups did mobilize during the referendum, despite having very few financial
resources, but they were overshadowed by the political parties. In the end these groups
(such as the “Solution Now Platform”) did eventually join the political parties (EDI and
DISY) that promoted a “yes” to the Annan Plan. But the international community,
especially the UN, was not active in promoting the UN Plan despite the fact that most
30

Most of these peacebuilding efforts by peace activists or “bi-communal” groups were facilitated by
foreigners and sponsored by international organizations and foreign missions, with the exception of some
trade union meetings held without structured facilitation by foreigners.

53

polls in the GC community indicated a “no” vote. What they did was too late, and the
people who attended these gatherings to explain the Plan were the converted ones. A joint
bi-communal movement supporting the Plan could have given very different messages to
Turkey, Greece and the international community. Instead, each side acted unilaterally
once again.
After the referenda the political climate changed in both communities. The GC “Yes”
supporters were viewed as unpatriotic. The president of the Republic coined them
“nenekides,” a very pejorative term, thus weakening democracy and judging the right of
citizens to disagree with their leadership’s decision. There followed a period of
disillusionment and loss of hope, despite the fact that the Republic became a member of
the European Union and leadership’s promises that EU involvement would lead to a
better solution to meet GC needs. The TCs were also gravely disappointed with the GC
referenda results. What these events show is that in Cyprus the dichotomy of “us” and
“them” still prevails and a zero-sum approach is adopted which leads to the deepening of
partition and mistrust.
Nevertheless, as our interviewees pointed out the benefits from such encounters and
trainings were significant in meeting the ‘other’, the perceived enemy. There is a need for
inter-personal and inter-group contacts in view of the fact that the two communities have
lived separately for decades and new generations being brought up without ever knowing
or meeting the ‘Other.’ That is why the Youth programs and peace camps are still very
much needed accompanied by research and evaluation of such programs. The utilization
of the opening of the check-points along the Green line could have also been utilized
politically with new initiatives and institutional support systems. Neither Track I nor the
peacebuilding groups took this opportunity seriously. Research has shown that a
substantial percentage of Cypriots from both communities have not crossed because of a
variety or reasons (passport or ID showing, fear, not politically correct as long as the
North is occupied by the Turkish army, or nationalism). These are additional indications
that there is still a lot of work to be done at the societal level.
The conclusion to be reached with all this complex process is that peacebuilding is a
multi track and dialectic phenomenon to be pushed and played at different levels of the
society in Cyprus as well as a favourable international conjuncture. More important is
the availability of the incentives for the sides to get mobilized whether these incentives
have to do with security, democracy or economic betterment. In Cyprus GC was eager to
join the EU for mainly security reasons and worked for a solution until the time when
they managed to achieve this without a solution. In the TC side the economic benefit and
democratization offered by EU prospects managed to change the leadership and political
position toward the Cyprus problem.
When the incentives are there and the conjuncture is in place, there remains the difficult
issue of organizing and pressing activities at cross-community bi-communal level rather
than just relying and focusing on mono-communal movements. When the process
becomes confined within single community, there is always the danger of falling in the
trap of “zero-sum” reflecting in words such as “This plan is good for us and not for the
others.” It should rather generate arguments such as “this plan is good for all and in the

54

end it is a ‘win-win’ so we should push the process together to reach a mutually accepted
arrangement internalized and actively supported by a good majority of both
communities.”

PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE
With the defeat of the rejectionist GC leader Papadopoulos in the elections held on
February 24, 2008, there is already a declared new initiative coming from the UN to
finally resume the stalled negotiations with an aim to reach a solution to the Cyprus
problem. The new president of the Republic of Cyprus and leader of the GC community,
Mr. Dimitris Christofias, has reiterated his commitment to a speedy and viable solution
and invited the TC leader, Mr. Mehmet Ali Talat, to join in this effort. A renewed sense
of hope may emerge. Given our analysis above we need to look at what incentives there
are for the two communities to support this new initiative.
On the GC side the two opposition leaders Kasoulides and Christofias both used the
inability of Papadopoulos to find a way forward to solve the problem as a theme in their
campaigns. They warned the people about the eventual ‘partition’ of the country into two
separate entities – a word that traditionally triggers anxiety and fear amongst the Greek
Cypriots. The GC community had expected that there would be a “European solution” to
the problem following Cyprus’ accession to the EU, meaning that Turkey would be
pressured by the EU to concede to a unitary state dominated by the Greek Cypriots for its
own EU aspirations. This did not prove to be the case; Turkey was ready to adopt a
slower pace towards the EU and not give in to pressures from the GC side exerted
through the European institutions, including the European Court of Human Rights.
At the same time, the EU found ways of keeping links with the TC community and their
administration in order to ease the isolation of the TC, help their economy to become
more even with that of GC, and prepare them for an eventual adoption of the Aquis
Communataire. 31 The European commission also declared on several occasions that the
problem was to be solved within the UN framework and accepted principles which were
emphasizing a bi-communal, bi-zonal federation with political equality of both
communities.
These developments could prove to be generating new incentives for the GCs to look
more favourably to a mutually accepted solution facilitated by the UN and supported by
the EU. The TC leadership and the Turkish mainland government will find it rather
difficult to block a new initiative in order not to lose their upper hand of being the prosolution side to the conflict. However, there is also a need for pressure and
encouragement from the civil society of both sides. Cross community activities will need
to have more impact so as not to create the zero-sum campaigns once again and rather
design joint activities to emphasize a win-win formula to solve the long lasting problem.
31

The Acquis Communautaire was suspended in the northern part soon after the accession of the South to
the EU.

55

It was evident from the interview content analysis that any new initiative should focus on
the following sensitive areas:
1) The empowerment of civil society to influence policy and to establish the necessary
mechanisms and institutions to enable the civil society to be more effective vis-à-vis
the policy makers should be supported.
2) The common economic benefits of a solution for both communities should be more
clearly and loudly emphasized.
3) More direct and outspoken peace activities concentrating on dialogue about the
sensitivities such as ‘equality’ and ‘occupation’ should be encouraged and supported.
4) De-politicization of education should be promoted and the transformation of this
institution into a conflict resolution and reconciliation mechanism where critical
thinking and mutual understanding.
5) Addressing the role of the media, with emphasis on creating a safe space for a more
objective and less politically distorted and one-sided media.
There is a need to build the joint mentality that the Cyprus conflict is a shared problem to
be solved cooperatively and that there exists an inter-dependent relationship between the
two communities. Strengthening of the peacebuilding civil society is seen to be needed
by programs for both conflict resolution training, dialogue groups on different issues, and
capacity building for institutions promoting joint projects as well as empowering NGOs.
This will produce a new political bi-communal culture and movement as well as policy
papers to be circulated both at the societal level and at the Track I. There is a need to
develop a third space in which all the peacebuilding groups and independent thinking
individuals will have the opportunity to meet and work together. The efforts should be to
make the peace process more civil society driven and less political leadership dominated.
It is at this very junction that the bi-communal peace activists can play a leading role with
their experience and skills and the necessary networks they have built over the years
across the divide. This can only be possible with a firm strategic support and
encouragement from the international community and their relevant organizations who
believe that peace and stability in Cyprus will make a lot of difference not only for the
region but for the security and well being of the whole humanity.

56

REFERENCES
Angelica, P.M. 1999. Evaluation of the Conflict resolution training efforts sponsored by
the Cyprus Fulbright Commission 1993-1998. Nicosia: Fulbright Catalogue.
URL: http://www.cyprus-conflict.net/angelica%20rpt%20-%201.htm
Attalides, M. 1979. Cyprus: Nationalism and International Politics. Edinburg: Q Press.
Broome, B. 1993. “Managing Differences in Conflict Resolution: The Role of Relational
Empathy” in Sandole, J.D. et al. (eds.). Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice.
Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, pp. 97-111.
Broome, B. 2004. “Reaching across the Dividing Line: Building a collective Vision for
Peace in Cyprus.” International Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 41, No. 2, pp. 191-209.
Broome, B. 2005. Building Bridges Across the Green Line. UNDP. Nicosia, Cyprus.
URL: europeandcis.undp.org/cpr/show/8628CA56-F203-1EE9-BF84783A811CC9F3
(accessed June 2, 2008).
Bryant, R. 2004. An Ironic Result in Cyprus. Middle East Report on Line.
www.merip.org (accessed June 2, 2008).
Bryant, R. 2004. Imagining the Modern, The cultures of nationalism in Cyprus. London,
New York: I.B. Tauris.
Chigas, D. Forthcoming. “Contributions and Constraints of Non-official Problem
Solving: The Harvard Study Group on Cyprus.” In Wolpe, H. and Lund, M. (Eds.),
forthcoming volume on Building Leadership and State Capacity. Washington, D.C.:
Wilson Center.
Cockburn, C. 2004. The Line, Women, Partition and the Gender Order in Cyprus.
London and New York: Zed Books.
Doob, L.W. 1974. “A Cyprus workshop: An exercise in intervention methodology.”
Journal of Social Psychology 94: 161-178.
Fisher, R., Ury, W. and Patton, B. 1991. Getting to YES: Negotiating Agreement
Without Giving In (2d edition). New York: Penguin Books.

57

Fisher, R. 1991. “Conflict Analysis Workshop in Cyprus.” Final Report Ottawa Canada:
Canadian Institute for International Peace and Security.
Hadjipavlou, M. 2006. “No Permission to Cross: Cypriot Women’s Dialogue across the
divide.” Gender Place and Culture, Vol. 13, No.4, August, pp. 329-353.
Hadjipavlou, M. 2004. “The Contribution of Bi-communal Contacts in Building a Civil
Society in Cyprus.” In Eagly A.E et al. (eds.) The Social Psychology of Group Identity
and Social Conflict Theory, Application and Practice. Washington, D.C.: APA, pp.193213.
Hadjipavlou, M. 2003. “Inter-ethnic stereotypes, neighbourliness, and separation
Paradoxes and challenges in Cyprus.” Journal of Mediterranean Studies, Vol. 13, No.2,
pp.340-360.
Hadjipavlou, M. 2002. “Cyprus: A Partnership Between Conflict Resolution and Peace
Education.” In (ed.) G. Salomon & B. Nevo Peace Education, the Concept, Principles and
Practice Around the World. Ppp.193-209. N.J London: Lawrence Erlbaun Associates
Publishers.
Hadjipavlou-Trigeorgis, M. 1998. “Different Relationships to the Land: Personal
Narratives, Political Implications and Future Possibilities.” In Calotychos, V. (Ed.)
Cyprus and its People, Nation, Identity, and Experience in an Unimaginable Community
1955-1997. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, pp. 251-277.
Hadjipavlou-Trigeorgis 1993. “Unofficial Inter-communal contacts and their contribution
to peacebuilding in conflict societies: The case of Cyprus.” Cyprus Review, Vol. 5, No.
2, pp.68-87.
Hatay, M. 2005. “Beyond Numbers, An Inquiry into the Political Integration of the
Turkish ‘Settlers’ in Northern Cyprus.” International Peace Research Institute (PRIO).
Oslo, Norway.
Hill, Sir George 1952. A History of Cyprus, Vol. IV. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Hunt, Sir David 1982. Footprints in Cyprus. London: Trigraph Ltd.
Joseph, J. 1997. “The United Nations, The European Union and Cyprus’ Search for
Security.” In Theophanous, A. et al. (eds.) Security and Cooperation in the Eastern
Mediterranean. Nicosia, Cyprus: Intercollege Press, pp.103-123.

58

Kelman, H. 1997. “Social-Psychological Dimensions of International Conflict,” in
Zartman, I.W. and L. Rasmussen, Peacemaking in International Conflict. Washington,
DC: United States Institute of Peace, pp. 191-238.
Kitromilides, P. 1977. “From Coexistence to Confrontation: The Dynamics of Ethnic
Conflict in Cyprus.” In M. Attalides (Ed.) Cyprus Reviewed. Nicosia: The Jus Cypri
Association.
Koumoulides, J. 1974. Cyprus and the Greek War of Independence, 1981-1829. Guilford
and London: Billing and Sons Ltd.
Kyriakides, S. 1968. Cyprus: Constitutionalism and Crisis Government. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Nedjatigil, Z.M. 1997. Cyprus: Constitutional Proposals and Developments. Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus, Public Information Office.
Papadakis, Y. 2005. Echoes from the Dead Zone-Across the Cyprus Divide. London,
New York: I.B. Taurus.
Patrick, R. A. 1976. Political Geography and the Cyprus Conflict. (1963-1971).
University of Waterloo Geography Department.
Pollis, A. 1998. “The Role of Foreign Powers in Structuring Ethnicity and Ethnic
Conflict.” In V. Calotychos (Ed.), Cyprus and its People, Nation, Identity, and
Experience in an Unimaginable Community 1955-1997. Boulder, Colorado: Westview
Press, pp. 87105.
Salih, H. I. 1968. Cyprus: Analysis of Cypriot Political Discord. New York: Theo Gaus
Sons.
Stephens, R. 1966. Cyprus: A Place of Arms. New York: Pall Mall.
Stern, L. 1975. “Bitter Lessons: How we failed in Cyprus.” Foreign Policy, No. 19,
(summer 1975), pp. 34-78.
Tocci, N. 2004. EU Accession Dynamics and Conflict Resolution-Catalysing Peace or
Consolidating Partition in Cyprus? London: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Tornarides, G. G. 1980. Cyprus and its Constitutional and Other Legal Problems (second
edition), Nicosia Press.

59

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2007. Cyprus, Youth and Peace
Building: A Program Review.
Volkan, V. 1978. Cyprus: War and Adaptation: A Psychoanalytic History of two Ethnic
Groups in Conflict. Charlottesville, Maryland: University of Virginia Press.
Xydis, S. G. 1973. Cyprus: Reluctant Republic. The Hague: Mouton.

60

APPENDIX: TIMELINE OF PEACEBUILDING PROGRAMS/INITIATIVES
Following is a timeline of peacebuilding programs and initiatives from the 1980s through
2007. While the timeline does not include all activities that have been undertaken in
Cyprus, it does include a substantial proportion of the activities, and thus can be
considered representative. The timeline will give a sense of the evolution of the
programming and initiatives over the past two and a half decades.
Timeline of Peacebuilding Programs/Initiatives
1980s:
Early to mid 80s

Professor L. Doob (Yale) held trainings titled “psychological
sensitivity training

1985

The “Intellectual Group,” consisting of 7 Greek Cypriots and 7
Turkish Cypriots met for three months at Ledra Palace under the
observation of the UN Special Representative for Cyprus, Holger,
and facilitated by Prof. Doob of Yale University, U.S.A..

1980s

Unofficial bi communal trade unions, political, professional groups
formed to build mutual understanding of concerns and perspectives
and to create possibilities for cooperation in view of future
solution.

1984

Professor Kelman hosted interactive problem solving bi communal
workshops with Cypriot intellectuals living then in the U.S.A.,
sponsored by the Middle Eastern Affairs Institute of Washington
D.C.

1988 - 1993

Ron Fisher at the Canadian Institute for International Peace and
Security hosted conflict analysis workshops which had an
extensive focus on the education system. The findings and
recommendations were published in Reports and academic articles.

1989

British Friends of Cyprus Committee, a bi communal group of
educationalists, discussed the role of education in a future federal,
bi communal Cyprus at Ledra Palace. A report and a press release
were then sent to politicians emphasizing the need to include role
of education in peace talks.

1989

The Educational Institute for Democracy and Preservation of the
Environment in Germany invited 20 Cypriots to a four- day
conference in Berlin to engage in open dialogue on the current
political situation and how it affected inter communal relations and

61

reflect on their role as citizens. Follow up with meetings were held
at Ledra Palace Hotel.
1990s:
1990

The first bi communal social movement formed: The Citizens Joint
Movement for a Federal and Democratic Cyprus as follow up to
the 1989 Educational Institute. It jointly organized activities until
1991 when Turkish authorities stopped permission with the pretext
of TC elections.

1991

Louise Diamond comes to Cyprus to explore possibilities for
conflict resolution work.

1991

Bi-communal Steering committee of 4 GCs and 4 TCs formed to
help in the conflict resolution process work in Cyprus.

1991

The Peace Centre Cyprus registered officially as NGO. The Centre
offers a Conflict Resolution perspective to students of conflict
through both mono and bi communal activities.

1992

Louise Diamond held conflict resolution workshops, one in each
community.

1993

Seminar on the Contribution of an Unofficial Effort to the IsraeliPalestinian negotiations.

1993

Oxford conflict resolution workshop for 10 GC and 10 TC,
including children of Denktash and Clerides, facilitated by Louise
Diamond and Ron Fisher.

1993

First Conflict Resolution workshop for CASP students held in
Boston.

19943

USAID began to fund workshops run by Cyprus Consortium
which consisted of trainings in conflict resolution and negotiation
skills. These workshops continued until 1997.

1993-2001

More than 60 interethnic groups formed and received formal
training in CR skills, communication, mediation, negotiation,
interactive management methodology, intercultural education and
dialogue. These groups consisted of special interest groups
including: women’s group, students, young environmentalists,
businessmen, educators, academics, citizens’ group, choir, artists,
management group, federation study group, EU study group. A

62

coordination group was established and 2 NGO resource centers
were set up in each community by UNOPS.
Mid 90s

Bi communal groups met with experts to discuss different types of
federalism as a system of governance for Cyprus. Exchange
programs also took GCs and TCs to the US and elsewhere to learn
about federalism in these places.

Mid 90s

GC and TC Citizens Movement for Democracy and Federation in
Cyprus established to mobilize ordinary citizens and the dialogue
between GC and TCs and hosted many public discussions to share
ideas, goals and positions of political parties in both communities.
TCs attended but no GCs, as they were blocked by Denktash. Also
hosted foreign diplomats stationed in Cyprus whose countries have
a federal system to discuss federalism, organised meetings to
jointly study and analyze federation and sponsored cultural events
and intra communal activities and discussions.

1993 - 1996

International Conflict Resolution Program of Columbia University
and PRIO facilitated meetings between the Cyprus Business Forum
with Richard Holbrook, the US presidential envoy.

1994 – 1995

Cyprus Consortium Conflict Resolution Trainings continued
including: Project Leaders 1 (Cyprus), Project Leaders 2 (Cyprus),
Conflict Resolution CASP Students (Boston), VIPS-Coolfont
USA, Training of Trainers (Cyprus), CASP Alumni 1,2,3
(Cyprus).

1994

Seminar on Intellectual Property Rights.

1994

Ben Broome workshops on Problem Definition with Business
Leaders.

1994

Harvard Tax Program

1994

Harvard University Conference on Cyprus (USA)

1994

Computer Education Program (Connecticut)

1994

Political youth leaders parties group met.

1994

Interactive Management process facilitated by Ben Broome for 15
GC and 15 TC to develop a strategy for peacebuilding for the next
9 months, meeting weekly and occasionally on weekends to
develop a vision statement and plan of activities, including a
bazaar at 300 people signed up to be involved in 12 projects.

63

1994 to 1997

Mid-Level Managers workshop conducted by the International
Management Development Institute, University of Pittsburgh,
Cyprus sponsored by the Cyprus Fulbright Commission. These
seminars resulted in a joint effort to set up a bi communal
Management Centre, which later evolved into two centres, The
Management Centre in the north and the NGO Support Centre in
the south.

1995

Ben Broome conducted a Problem Definition workshop for youth
leaders.

1995

Ben Broome conducted problem solving workshops with young
business leaders, youth leaders and women’s groups.

1995

Conflict resolution workshop for educators. The second workshop
in 1996 resulted in the formation of a group to explore education
systems in Cyprus.

1995

Aikido, Chris Thorsen, hired by Cyprus Consortium

1995

EU Federation study group formed which continued through 1996.

1995

“Train the Trainers” and “Training of Facilitators” workshops
hosted by Ben Broome produced local team of Cypriot trainers on
Interactive Management methodology.

1995

Peace concert held.

1995

Young Business Leaders Group was invited to Brussels to present
the views of both communities on Cyprus’ accession to EU.

1995 - 1997

Cyprus Consortium Conflict Resolution Trainings continued
including: Advanced training of trainers (Cyprus), Conflict
Resolution CASP Students (yearly in Boston), VIPs (Airlie, USA),
Educators (Boston), Youth Camp (USA), Project Management
(Cyprus), Mediation (Cyprus).

1995-96

Bi Communal Women’s Group formed to try to understand what
has contributed to the pain and suffering in Cyprus. Insights to
obstacles included psychological, structural, historical and
political, and philosophical.

1995

The International Management Development Institute at the
University of Pittsburgh held a workshop for Senior Level
Executives in Pittsburgh.

64

1996

Mid-Level Managers met in February and October in Cyprus,
sponsored by the International Management Development Institute
at the University of Pittsburgh.

1996

Bi-Communal Conflict Resolution Trainers workshop met for 9
months to identify the fears, concerns and obstacles to resolution.
It found 12 categories of obstacles and created a Vision Map to
provide direction for CR workshops and to overcome the obstacles
identified.

1996 - present

The Cyprus American Scholarship Program (CASP) holds a two
week intensive summer program yearly in inter-communal
confidence building workshops at School for International
Training in Vermont for college aged participants-recipients of
CASP scholarships to study in the United States.

1996

6-week seminar took place to discuss identity, commonalities and
uniqueness of Cypriot culture.

1996

Journalist Workshop for editors was held in Washington D.C.

1996

Internet Workshop (Cyprus)

1996

Senior Business group formed

1997

Youth peace camps continued.

1997

Mid Level Managers workshops took place in February, March,
and October in Cyprus, sponsored by the International
Management Development Institute at the University of Pittsburgh.

1997

Senior Level Executives workshop in Pittsburgh (USA) by the
International Management Development Institute at the University
of Pittsburgh

1997

Brussels Women’s Group

1997

Bi-communal Business Forum formed in response to the Brussels
theme “in economic cooperation lies mutual benefit.” This Forum
focused on economic development and identified large economic
asymmetries that existed.

1997

Bi-communal Youth group formed which was very critical of the
political culture and leadership and the structural and institutional
violence called Youth Encounters for Peace (YEP).

65

1997

Interactive Management workshops with student groups and
citizen groups continued.

1997

Training of Trainers for Interactive Management skills continued.

1997

The First Four Party (GC, TC, Greek and Turkish) Interactive
Management workshop was held in Le Diableret, Switzerland.

1997

Co Villagers Project began

1997

Confidence building workshops continued.

1997

Conference on civic education on developing NGOs.

1997

Speaker Program organized by Fulbright. Presenters included
Carley and Sisk and topics included Negotiation and Mediation in
Intractable conflicts.

1997

Journalist Workshop held in D.C. for working journalists.

1977

Conflict Resolution Facilitation Workshop held in DC.

1997

Federalism workshop held in Philadelphia.

1997

Special Investigators workshops held in DC and Miami.

1997

Labor Leaders workshop held.

1997

Local Governance in a Federal System workshop held.

1997

Proliferation of groups, including: Artists, Identity seminar, HADE
magazine, Federation group, Internet group, Youth encounters for
peace, Young environmentalists, Environmental groups, covillagers, University students I and II, Management group,
Lawyers, and Accountants.

1997

Conflict Management and Mediation workshops by Marco Turk
for TC women’s group, mental healthcare professionals, Domestic
Violence Crisis Centre, Cyprus Police Academy, citizens groups,
youth groups, American International School teachers, and UN
Humanitarian troops.

1997

Administration of Justice workshop by Marco Turk

66

1997-1998

Intractability Project, Cyprus Consortium, consisting of 4 bicommunal workshops to analyse and address the elements of
intractability.

1997

Mediation Training for Lawyers by Marco Turk

1997

Family Peace Makers Bi Communal Training by Marco Turk

1997

Family Peace Makers, Psychiatric Community Nurses (GC)
workshop by Marco Turk

1998

Family Peace Makers workshop for Health Care Professionals in
the north by Marco Turk

1998

Training for the Mental Health Care Professionals held by Marco
Turk

1998

Training for Psychologists by Marco Turk

1998

Cyprus Police training by Marco Turk

1998

Cyprus Police training II held by Marco Turk

1998

Humanistic Mediation Training workshop by Marco Turk

1998

Mediation Workshop for Adolescents by Marco Turk

1998

Introduction to Mediation in the Schools by Marco Turk

1998

Humanistic Conflict Management Skills by Marco Turk

1998

Family Peace Makers training for Cyprus Turkish Women’s
Movement for Peace and Federal Solution by Marco Turk

1998

Family Peace Makers Training for Brussels Women’s Group
Marco Turk

1998

Family Peace Makers Training for Citizens Group by Marco Turk

1998

Mediation Training for Mixed Spouses by Marco Turk

1998

Tech 4 Peace website established.

1998

www.peace-cyprus.org established which posted petitions on basic
needs and beliefs about a solution. A letter was then sent to the UN

67

which was signed by 41 grassroots organizations urging a speedy
solution.
1998

Curriculum Development workshop

1998

Environmental Pollution workshop conducted

1998

Banking in a Federal System workshop took place.

1998

World Peace Foundation Conference, Cyprus 2000: Divided or
Federal? (USA)

1998

Young Leaders Network workshop in Israel facilitated by Ben
Broome.

1998

Federal and Peace-building conference in Israel

1998

Federalism and Peacemaking workshops conducted by Dr. Elazar

1998
Johnson

Revitalizing the Heart of a City conference held, hosted by Dr.

1998

Young Leaders Network Conference took place in Egypt (Peres
Conference)

1998

Federalism and Peacemaking workshops conducted by Dr. Elazar.

1998

Youth Camps took place, sponsored by Seeds of Peace and SIT.

1998

Peacebuilding Conflict Intervention Training Skills workshop took
place in Oslo (Oslo I)

1998

Peacebuilding Conflict Intervention Training Skills workshop took
place in Oslo (Oslo II).

1998 – 2005

Bi Communal Development Programme (BDP), sponsoring design
and implementation of projects of common interest between Greek
and Turkish Cypriots. Worked with over 300 different Cypriot
organizations and supported some 220 projects, including:
̇ Open Public Panel Discussions on Cyprus, Association for
Social Reform (OPEK) in association with a range of civil
society organizations
̇ Understanding Bi-communal Perceptions and Attitudes, The
Peace Centre
̇ Bi-communal Perceptions of the Annan Plan, Cyprus
Sociological Association

68

̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇

The Information Project - Website, Panel Discussions and
Training, PRIO (International Peace Research Institute, Oslo)
The Harvard Study Group: A Bi-communal Multi-stakeholder
Dialogue, Harvard University
Youth Promoting Peace: Bi-communal Youth Peace Activities,
Youth Promoting Peace
Support Centres for NGOs including Training Programmes,
Association of Management Studies, Cyprus Turkish
Association of Managers, Management Centre, UNOPS Direct
Execution
Establishment of Mediation Centres, Greek Cypriot
Association of Mediation and North Cypriot Mediation
Association
Conference on Federalism and Publication of Proceedings,
Centre for the Study of Federalism and Self-Government
Conference and Education Centre, Cyprus Turkish Medical
Association
Short Course Bi-communal Summer School Programme,
United World Colleges Cyprus
Education for Peace: A Study of Bias in History and Social
Science Course Books, AKTI, POST
Parallel Trips: Production of a Documentary on Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot Families, Artimages
Gimme6 Bi-communal TV Series for Children: Building
Tolerance and Mutual Understanding Through Media, Search
for Common Ground
Bi-communal Comedy Series Script Preparation, Tariman
Productions, Camera-Stylo Recording Arts Productions
Cypriot Folk Dance Performance
Preparation of First Bilingual (Turkish/Greek) Edition of an
Arts Magazine
Bi-communal Theatre Productions
Bi-communal Development and Production of Dance/Theatre
Performance
Bi-communal Conference on Prospects for a United Cyprus
Bi-communal Communication and Cooperation Seminar
Bi-communal May Day Celebration in Limassol
Bi-communal Peace Celebration in Limassol
Peace Concert
Cyprus Olympic Truce Declaration
Bi-communal Voyage of Understanding – Tall Ships Sailing
Trip for Cypriot Youth
Translation of Book on Political and Social Issues for the PEO
Cyprus Labour Institute
Bi-communal Children’s Camp in Ayios Nicholas
Children’s Congress

69

̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇

Conference on Early Childhood
Rockathon: Merging Cultures: Bi-communal Music Event
Bi-communal Conference on Gender in the Mediterranean:
Emerging Discourses and Practices
International Women’s Day Celebration
Empowering Young Women for Success – Workshop For
Young Women
Internet Forum for Civic Expression
Preparations for Beijing NGO Conference
Pan European NGO Seminar
Civil Society Common Initiative Panel Discussion
14th International Conference of the Alliance of Universities
for Democracy
International Conference on Violence
4th Global Conference on Cultures of Violence
HIV/AIDs Conference
World AIDS Day Celebration
Public Education on HIV/AIDS and STD Prevention
International Thalassemia Conference
International Cardiology Forum
Conference on Laparoscopic Surgery
Conference for the Deaf
World Environment Day
Training of Facilitators for Rural Land Use Decision-Making
Processes
Focus Group
Human Rights Festival
Conference: ‘Scientific word of Civilisation

1999 - 2001

The Harvard Study Group brought together mid to high level
influentials over six meetings to directly discuss the major issues
of the conflict and to propose options for resolution.

1999

Advanced Mediation Training and Techniques workshop by Marco
Turk for Cyprus Police

1999

CASP Scholars Emil and Marion Angelica held workshops on the
role of NGOs

1999

International Conference on Sub-National Constitutionalism

1999

Historic Cities Conference conducted by Dr. Johnson

1999

Conflict Resolution CASP Scholars workshop at Duquesne
University

70

1999

Curriculum Development II workshops held by Dr. Dickens at
James Madison University

1999

Water Management Program held, STT

1999

Local Governance in a Federal System I lectures conducted by Dr.
Kinkaid in Cyprus

1999

Seeds of Peace Summer Camp held.

1999

Academic Groups traveled to Israel for workshops. These were
supported by the Fulbright Commission.

1999
USA

Local Governance in a Federal System II by Dr. Kincaid in the

1999

Distance Learning workshop held in Finland

1999

Geographical Information Systems workshop took place in USA

1999

USIS NATO Journalist Tour took place in Italy

1999

Inauguration of Jerusalem Seeds of Peace (SOP) Center, October

1999

Women Waging Peace (WWP) Conference took place. The
Fulbright Commission was the Local Partner for Ambassador
Swanee Hunt’s WWP initiative.

1999

Robert Rotberg (Harvard) lecture in Cyprus

1999

Cypriot Youth held an event at Pergamos Park, a mixed village, to
enjoy music and dancing

2000s
2000

Youth Encounters for Peace organized a meeting in Pyla. This was
the first locally owned peacebuilding workshop with no third party.
It brought together teachers, local facilitators, youth, and people
living in mixed villages totaling hundreds of Cypriots.

2000

Bi-communal group of CR trainers met in Neve Shalom, Israel to
stress the need to intensify efforts at official and unofficial
diplomatic levels to change status quo.

2000

Seeds of Peace started their youth oriented project

71

2000

Center for Democracy and Reconciliation in Southeastern Europe
conducted workshops on textbooks and history teaching. These
workshops were held at Pyla village with the participation of TC
and GC and Turkish and Greek academics.

2000

Liver Anesthesiology workshop in January – February

2000

Seeds of Peace workshop in January in Jerusalem with a second
due to take place in October, but was cancelled due to trouble in
the area.

2000

Civil Military course at Harvard in April

2000

Stock Exchange workshop

2000

CASP Conflict Resolution workshop for senior and graduate
students in May

2000

CASP Confidence Building workshop for sophomores in August

2000

Apple Chambers Players workshop held in Israel in February

2000

Women in Business workshop held in June

2000

Domestic Violence workshop held in July

2000

Three youth camps were held during the summer

2000

A Special Education workshop was held in July

2000

Sustainable Planning workshop held in July

2000

Emergency Management workshop held in September

2000

Historic Preservation Workshop held in August

2000

Workshop for Teachers on Conflict Resolution Skills held in
August

2000

Education Administration workshop held in September

2000

A Standards of Care in Nursing workshop was held in November

2000

An Uncommon past project – a common future (Juliette Dickstein
– Sept 11, 2000 to March 11, 2001)

72

2000

Workshop on the establishment of setting up a health center for
domestic violence victims, November 2000

2000

Asbestos Workshop held in November

2000

Peter Sulski held a Community Building workshop via Music from
December 2000 to April 2002.

2000

Empowerment of Women Follow up workshop held Cyprus

2001

Two Centres were established, The Management centre in the TCC
and the NGO Support Centre in the GCC in order to support and
strengthen the civil society and reconciliation activities.

2001

Dr. David Schnall – Lectures on NGOs in January

2001

Intensive Care in Nursing workshop held in March

2001

An Intensive English and Drug Awareness program, summer

2001

American Studies Colloquium held

2001

Two Summer Youth Camps held

2001

Drug Awareness and Prevention for Professionals workshop held
in the fall

2001

CASP in residence for Drug Awareness and Prevention for 7
months – R Kibben

2001

Administering a Rehabilitation and Therapeutic Center workshop
held in November

2001

Conflict Resolution workshop for CASP students

2001

Confidence Building workshop for CASP students

2002

Children’s Art for Peace Program

2002

Information Technology workshop

2002

Drug Prevention Workshop Number 3

2002

Two Youth Camps

2002

CASP Conflict Resolution

73

2002

CASP Confidence Building

2002

Motivational Interviewing in Crete – R Kibben/A Demirjian

2003

“Search for Common Ground” initiated a program for school
children

2003

Prime for Life – Cyprus Based

2003

American Studies Colloquium

2003

CASP Confidence Building Workshop

2003

CASP Conflict Resolution Workshop

2003

Youth Camp

2003

Community Building via music – Margerie Gere

2003 – present

Hands Across the Divide, a bi-communal women’s NGO, formed
to carry out joint actions for peace. Currently is working to revive
Famagusta including Varosha. IT works along with the New
Cyprus Party (YKP), German Cypriot Forum, Friends of Nature
Cyprus, TC Teachers Trade Union (KTOS), Cyprus Art
Association (KSD), Rights and Freedoms Association

2003 – present

Association for Historical Dialogue and Research founded,
working on projects on education and to develop trainings for
teachers for the new history textbooks in the north.

2004 - present

Cyprus Bold Leaders Youth Camp (sponsored by US Embassy’s
Bi-communal Support Program) to provide thirty Cypriot youth
with a 21 day experience that breaks down pre-conceived
stereotypes, provides an opening for greater relatedness,
understanding, and compassion, and fosters a commitment to
becoming future leaders of peace in their homeland.

2004

Summer Academic Term

2004

Family Law in a Federal System (Judges, US)

2004

NAADAC Certification (bi communal training in substance abuse)

2004

Fulbright Scholar, Jay Noller, CASP funding for
Geophormological Research

74

2004

Council of Europe – co funded seminar on Reform of History
Textbooks

2004

Follow up youth programs – John Ungerleider

2004

Conflict Resolution Workshops for CASP students

2004

Confidence Building Workshop for CASP students

2004

Drug Prevention projects – Ernestos Randolphi

2005

Youth Camp

2005

Summer Academic Term

2005

American Colloquium

2005

CASP Conflict Resolution Workshop

2005

CASP Confidence Building Workshop

2005

Margerie Gere – Community Building via music

2005 – present

UNDP-Action for Cooperation and Trust (ACT) launched in
October 2005 to replace the Bi Communal Development
Programme. Provides funding and coordination support for
projects that are designed and implemented by Cypriots, and which
in turn actively promote inter-communal cooperation, focusing in
multicultural education, civil society strengthening and promoting
sustainable development. The project funds over 100 projects,
including:
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇
̇

Conflict Resolution & Peace Education (CRE/PE), by
Mediation Association, KAYAD, Peace Centre, British
Council
History Teacher Training Project by the Centre for Democracy
and Reconciliation in Southeast Europe (CDRSEE)
Provision of Multicultural Youth Camp Training by
International Child Development Initiatives
Playing for Peace by Playing for Peace
Youth Dialogue project
The Madison Dairy Advisory Group (MADAG) offering
technical expertise to all dairy farmers on the island.
The Cyprus Organics Advisory Group (COAG) composed of
organic farming experts and aims to share expertise,
75

̇
̇

information and guidance on matters related to the production
and consumption of organic products in Cyprus.
Emergency Disease Forum of leading veterinary and health
experts to ensure a rapid and coordinated island–wide response
to any public health emergency.
Cyprus Environmental Stakeholder Forum, to create the
conditions for the eventual establishment of a bi-communal
platform of environmental stakeholders willing to agree on a
list of common environmental priorities which they will
advocate together at international environmental events.

2005 – 2007

Doves Olympic Movement, camps for 100 children

2006

Six youth camps with over 260 participants, sponsored by UNDPACT

2006

Summer Academic Term

2006

CASP Conflict Resolution Workshop

2006

The Peace Centre: Coexistence and Diversity Matter. Camp for
40 participants i.e. 10 Greek, 10 Turkish, 10 Greek Cypriots and
10 Turkish Cypriots on a week-long camp in partnership with
WINPEACE.

2006

ESC Environmental Studies Centre (Kritou Terra): Environmental
Summer Programmes for young educators and young citizens.
Three residential camps on environment, education and
conservation issues for trainees, young teachers and secondary
school pupils to raise environmental awareness in both
communities.

2006

CLTS Centre for Leisure, Tourism and Sport Research and
Development: Doves Olympic Movement. Camp for sport and
educational activities for 120 children.

2006

Tall Ships Youth Trust: European Voyage of Understanding.
Brought together 12 Cypriots from both communities to join a
crew of 36 other young people from Europe to sail for 10 days on
a square-rigged ship from Gibraltar to Minorca in the
Mediterranean.

2006

Frederick Institute of Technology: Camping, Fitness and
Education- CA.F.E. Camp for 40 young Greek and Turkish
Cypriots to promote mutual respect and tolerance among Cypriots
and promote the concept of a ‘Healthy mind in a healthy body’.

76

2006

KAYAD Community Centre: “Together Anything is possible.” 26
young people (13 Greek Cypriots / 13 Turkish Cypriots) brought
together in a 10-day camp focused on community service projects
of common interest for both communities.

2006 – present

Cyprus Civil Society Strengthening Programme run by The
Management centre and NGO Support Centre sponsored by
UNDP-ACT

2006 – present

Anti-TIP NGO Capacity Building, supported by the US Embassy’s
Bi-communal Support Program, to

2007

American Studies Workshop

2007

Youth Program

2007

Summer Academic Term

2007

CASP Conflict Resolution Workshop

2007

Anti-Racism, Anti-Nationalist Group was formed in reaction to
events at the English School.

2007

‘Let’s Unite our Beautiful Island’ is a youth group which is
organized on Face Book. Its first meeting of youth, parents and
family took place on 6 August 2007.

2007

Eight youth camps sponsored by UNDP-ACT

2007

Frederick Research Centre: Environmental Education for
Educators-3E

2007

Limassol Traditional Karate Association: Building cells of true
tolerance and multiculturalism through traditional karate. Brings
together about 50 children of the different communities of Cyprus
(Greek Cypriots, Turkish Cypriots, Armenian Cypriot and
Maronite Cypriots) in a year-long training programme in
traditional karate.

2007

ESC Environmental Studies Centre (Kritou Terra)
1. Environmental Camp for Secondary School Teachers
2. Environmental Camp for Primary School Teachers
3. Environmental Camp for High School Students

77

2007

Municipality of Idalion: Camp Against Racism (CAR). Camp and
subsequent establishment of a network against racism in Dali. The
participants will also actively engage in a theatrical performance
dealing with anti-racism as a follow up to the camp.

2007

KAYAD Community Centre: Together Anything is Possible.

2007
Beginners

Soma Akriton Youth Organisation: Volunteerism Lessons for
Soma Akriton organises year-long activities that set up a step by
step training for 200 children, teenagers and young people for
promoting volunteerism.

2007

University of Cyprus: Science Youth Camp - Science Camp for
Girls for 50 girls aged 11-14

2007

Doves Olympic Movement: Building a common future through
sport and education

2007

Corporate Social Responsibility training for up-and-coming
Cypriot businessmen and women over 9 weeks in Cyprus and
Seattle, Washington.

2007

Athens Journalists Symposium

Categories of Peacebuilding Programs/Initiatives
In order to better understand the nature and evolution of peacebuilding efforts in Cyprus
over time, we have devised 12 categories under which most of the peacebuilding
programs fall. Many programs can be classified under more than one of the categories,
but the categories are designed to facilitate understanding of the types of programs that
have been undertaken over time, and the intensity and focus of programming.
The categories are as follows:
1- Education: programs/initiatives by academics, for academics and educators,
focused on the educational system/curricula, academic conferences on topics of
joint interest to Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, and training, camps and
other educational experience for youth and students.
2- Conflict Resolution: programs/initiatives, including training, dialogue, research
and activities, focused specifically on gaining a better understanding, mastery or
knowledge of principles and practice of conflict resolution, especially in the
Cyprus context.
3- Dialoguing Events: direct dialogue, discussion, and problem solving between
Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, either on issues concerning the Cyprus
problem or on other problems (e.g., environment) of joint concern to both sides.

78

4- Management: programs working with managers or on management issues.
5- Youth and Business Leaders: work with youth (from school-age to young
politicians) and businesspeople.
6- Women’s Groups: women’s groups working on peace issues or joint groups
working on issues related to gender and women’s rights.
7- Cultural Events: Bi-communal cultural events, ranging from concerts and art
exhibits to celebrations of environment, human rights and other public events.
8- Negotiation and Mediation Groups: training and work on negotiation and
mediation skills.
9- Federalist Group: groups and workshops exploring federalism in the context of
Cyprus, in comparative perspective.
10- Mix Groups: mixed groups of Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots doing
projects together.
11- Activities/Trainings for Professions: activities and trainings targeting specific
professions (e.g., investigators, doctors, etc.)
12- Programs for NGOs and CSOs: programs related to the strengthening of civil
society.
The highest concentration of programs from the 1980s – present is in education and
youth: trainings, youth camps, conferences and workshops in particular academic or
professional areas. This has been consistent from the 1980s. Cultural events and
activities have been undertaken and received consistent support over the years as well.
At the same time, there have been fewer direct conflict resolution and dialogue activities
after 2000, although many of the youth trainings and camps often incorporate some
conflict resolution skills work into their programs. Dialogue activities have continued,
but many now focus on professional or practical areas of joint interest to Greek Cypriots
and Turkish Cypriots, rather than on the Cyprus problem. This trend reflects a shift in
funding support to programs for NGOs and CSOs (civil society strengthening) and to
activities and trainings for professions and a shift to an approach of promoting intercommunal reconciliation and cooperation through strengthening civil society’s capacity
to make its voice heard on policy issues, and promoting cooperation in areas of common
interest.

79

