 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Citizens´ Rapprochement by the 
Local Peace Constituencies  
bi-communal Conflict Resolution Trainer Group 
in Cyprus  
Oliver Wolleh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author 
Oliver Wolleh, Dr. phil. (des.), associate researcher at the Berghof Research Center 
for Constructive Conflict Management. Special interests: Strategies of civilian conflict 
management and the role of NGOs in peace-building processes.  
 
Publications related to Cyprus: 
Peacebuilding Aktivitäten der bikommunalen „Conflict Resolution Trainer“ Gruppe in 
Zypern, Berghof Ocassional Paper, Nr. 12, Berlin, 1997. 
Gesellschaftliche Vertrauensbildung: Über die schwierige Anerkennung in Zypern , in: 
Gewaltfreie Aktion Heft 115/116, 30. Jahrg., 1. + 2. Quartal 1998. 
Bürgergruppen für den Frieden in Zypern  (zus. mit Katie Economidou) in: Evers, 
Tilman (Hrsg.), „Ziviler Friedensdienst - Fachleute für den Frieden“, S. 330-338, 
Opladen, 2000. 
Cyprus: A Civil Society Caught up in the Question of Recognition , in: European 
Platform for Conflict Prevention and Transformation (ed.), Searching for Peace in 
Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, to be published in June 2001.  
 
Study 
This study was initially written for the „Reflecting On Peace Practice Project“ 
conducted by The Collaborative for Development Action (Cambridge, MA) and the Life 
& Peace Institute (Uppsala). The present text has been revised and supplemented 
with new information. I would like to thank the project management for the right to 
publish this study as well as the members of the Cyprus Consortium. Last but not 
least I show appreciation towards the people whose work has been examined and 
who were kind enough to share their ideas with me.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8 
March 2001 
© Berghof Research Center for Constructive Conflict Management 
 
Contact Address: 
Berghof Research Center for Constructive Conflict Management 
Altensteinstraße 48a 
14195 Berlin / Germany 
 
Via Internet: 
http://www.berghof-center.de 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISSN 0949–6858  
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Introduction .............................................................................................................. .... 1 
 
1   The Cyprus Conflict........................................................................................................ 3 
 
2   The Development of the Trainer Group on the Background of the Cyprus Consortium 
and the US Network .......................................................................................................6  
2.1 The Trainer Group as an Internal Actor .................................................................... 12 
2.2 The First Phase of Proliferation ............................................................................... 13 
2.3 The Temporary Disruption of Activities ................................................................... 16 
2.4 The Second Phase of Proliferation .......................................................................... 17 
 
3   The Structure of the Bi-Communal Groups .................................................................. 18 
 
4   The Dialogue in the Bi-Communal Groups...................................................................20 
 
5   Obstacles for the Bi-Communal Process......................................................................23  
5.1 Obstacles in the Context of Encounters ...................................................................23 
5.2 Counterbalancing Interventions in the Context of Encounters .................................27 
5.2.1  Meeting in the Middle....................................................................................27 
5.2.2 “Easy Access” Interventions...........................................................................30 
5.2.3  Checkpoint Interventions ..............................................................................32 
5.3 Obstacles in the Context of Institutionalisations .....................................................33 
 
6   The Development Since 1997 ......................................................................................39 
 
7   Lessons learned ..........................................................................................................45  
 
     Bibliography.............................................................................................................. ..47 
 
     Appendix .................................................................................................................. ...49 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
1 
 Introduction 
 
 
 
This Case study details the development and progress of a bi-communal Conflict 
Resolution Trainer Group on the divided island of Cyprus. The Trainer Group consists 
of 30 Greek and Turkish Cypriot members and can be defined as an internal 
grassroots structure aiming to initiate a range of peace-building projects. Its Greek 
Cypriot members live in the South, the Turkish Cypriot members in the North of the 
divided island.1 Between 1994 and the end of 1997 the Trainer Group founded 25 bi-
communal follow-up groups on “track–two” as well as on “track-one-and-a-half” 
level, initiated several projects and arranged “visits to the other side” for citizens. 
The Trainer Group is remarkable in several respects. It can be described as the 
most important and citizen based rapprochement / peace-building group on Cyprus 
and through its network of facilitated bi-communal follow-up groups they created a 
process of dialogue and encounters which since the events in 1974 is unique in its 
intensity and extent. Apart from this, the Trainer Group uses an approach to conflict 
resolution in their work influenced by the Cyprus Consortium and the Cyprus 
Fulbright Commission. The close relations the Trainer Group has with foreign actors 
illuminate the possibilities and risks of such a partnership. 
After the EU summit meeting in December 1997 in Luxembourg the Turkish-
Cypriot leadership almost totally restricted the movement of Turkish Cypriots within 
well established places of encounter in the buffer zone. This ban lasted until the next 
EU summit in February 2000 in Helsinki. It affected the meetings of existing bi-
communal groups and the established forms of bi-communal encounters. However, 
it did not totally suppress the commitment of the Trainer Group for peace and after, 
a shock phase, caused new forms of bi-communal activities to develop. 
The information in this case study was gathered according to an inductive, 
interview based method that was strongly influenced by the Grounded Theory 
Approach. There were two phases of field studies. Firstly, in 1996 and 1997, 
                                                           
1  With the exception of one Turkish Cypriot who lives in the South. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
2 
interviews were carried out in connection with the author’s dissertation.2 During this 
phase a total of 55 interviews were held with 62 persons. The interviewees were 
members of the Trainer Group, representatives of foreign organisations such as the 
Cyprus Consortium, the Cyprus Fulbright Commission, the United Nations, various 
foreign embassies, political observers and people who, like the Trainer Group, were, 
or had been in the past, involved in bi-communal activities. 
In the summer of 2000 the author conducted a second series of interviews 
with 15 persons for the project “Reflecting on Peace Practice” (RPP). These 
interviews were focused on the evaluation of the developments since 1997 and on 
the additional specifics of the RPP study to the existing material. The interviewees 
were trainers, some fully active and others who had been partly active since the 
massive disruptions. Additionally, representatives of the political parties in the 
North and South were questioned and also representatives of the Institute for Multi-
Track Diplomacy (IMTD) and the Conflict Management Group (CMG). 
The report begins with a short description of the historical development of the 
Cyprus conflict. The main part of the report deals with the origins and the 
development of the Trainer Group as one of the most successful social initiatives on 
Cyprus. The analysis focuses on the obstacles the Trainer Group encountered when 
implementing their initiative and on how the spectrum of activities of the Trainer 
Group could be broadened by the support of foreign actors. 
 
                                                           
2  Wolleh, Oliver: Möglichkeiten und Grenzen interner Akteure bei der Friedensbildung in geteilten Gesellschaften - 
Die Conflict Resolution Trainer Group in Zypern (1993 -1997) ["Abilities and limits of internal peacebuilding actors 
in divided societies - The Conflict Resolution Trainer Group in Cyprus (1993 - 1997).“], Ph.D. diss., Free University 
Berlin, (to be published 2001). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
3 
1 The Cyprus Conflict 
 
 
 
The relationship between Greece and Turkey on Cyprus goes back to the 16
th
 century 
when the Ottoman Empire conquered the island that at that time was ruled by the 
Venetians. The following three hundred years of Ottoman rule are considered a 
period of peaceful co-existence. When the British landed in 1878, they formally 
ended the Ottoman rule, and, in 1925 Cyprus became a British Crown Colony. 
At the beginning of the nineteen-thirties, some island Greeks started a 
movement to unite Cyprus with the “motherland” Greece ( Enosis  in Greek). The 
British government, however, for strategic reasons was not prepared to give up the 
island and blocked the Enosis-plans by Greece and the Greek Cypriots.3 
As a result, in 1955 the armed struggle for a union was started by the Greek 
Cypriot underground movement “EOKA” against the British colonial power. The 
British used Turkish Cypriot units against the EOKA as the Turkish community on the 
island rejected the union with Greece.  During this time, apart from Turkish Cypriot 
police units, the first Turkish armed underground organisations such as “Volkan” 
and later “TMT” were formed who, with the support from Turkey and the permission 
of the British colonial administration, took up the fight against EOKA. In 1959/1960 
the negotiations in Zurich and London between Great Britain, Greece and Turkey led 
to the independence of Cyprus. All three states became guarantors of the new 
Republic of Cyprus. In 1960, the majority of the island population and its political 
leadership found themselves in a political construct that did not correspond to their 
political ideas. While the armed struggle of the EOKA had aimed for the political 
union of Cyprus with Greece, the Turkish Cypriot underground organisations first 
fought for the prevention of Enosis and later for the division of the Island ( Taksim  
in Turkish). Under these conditions the implementation of the young republic’s 
complicated, very detailed and clearly bi-communal constitution was only very 
difficult to realise.4 
                                                           
3  See Markides, Kyriacos C., 1977: The Rise and Fall of the Cyprus Republic, New Haven: Yale University Press. 
4  Salem, Norma, 1992: The Constitution of 1960 and its Failure, in: Salem, Norma: Cyprus: A Regional Conflict and 
its Resolution, New York: St. Martin´s Press. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
4 
In 1963, President Makarios attempted to make thirteen constitutional 
changes to overcome the inner-political constitutional crisis and the blockade. He 
aimed to change the constitutional distribution of power between the ethnic groups 
giving the advantage to the Greek Cypriots. This was the trigger for violent inter-
communal fighting during which about 1,000 Turkish and 200 Greek Cypriots were 
killed. The crisis led to the resignation of the Turkish Cypriot members of the 
government and to the formation of Turkish enclaves. In 1964 the so far quite mixed 
communities were divided politically and administratively. This also led to the 
involvement of the UN Security Council and the deployment of the UN Blue Helmets, 
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNICYP). 
Even though the demand for Enosis among the island Greeks increasingly lost 
political support after the military coup in Greece, the Greek Cypriot government and 
the developing Turkish Cypriot administration of the enclaves did not succeed in 
finding a solution for the constitutional crisis.5 
On July 20
th
 1974, Turkish troops landed in reaction to the coup against 
President Makarios supported by the Greek Junta with the aim of Enosis. During the 
invasion, that occurred in two stages approximately 60,000 Turkish Cypriots fled 
from their enclaves to the North of the island controlled by the Turkish army, while 
200,000 island Greeks fled into the South. To this day 1,619 Greek Cypriots, 
including civilians, are still missing. Since then, between 30,000 and 35,000 Turkish 
troops have been stationed in the North. Their withdrawal has been demanded by 
the United Nations in numerous resolutions. 
In 1975 the Turkish Cypriots declared the “Turkish Federal State” and in 1983 
the “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” (TRNC) which to this day is only 
recognized by Turkey. Since 1964, the Greek Cypriot southern part of the island 
claims to be the only true representative of the Republic of Cyprus. The economic 
differences between the North and the South are marked. 
There have been numerous attempts by UN General Secretaries to start 
negotiations but none of them has led to a solution. However, some inter-communal 
negotiations have been partly successful. In 1977 and 1979 both sides agreed on a 
“bi-communal”, “bi-zonal” and “federal” solution. But the positions of both parties 
                                                           
5  See Crawshaw, Nancy, 1978: The Cyprus Revolt: An Account of the Struggle for Union with Greece. London:  Allen 
& Unwin. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
5 
regarding the actual implementation of this formula diverge widely. While the Greek 
Cypriots and the mainland government in Athens aim for a federation with a strong 
central government in which the Turkish Cypriot population has a minority status, 
the Turkish Cypriot government strictly rejects the legal status as a minority and 
pleads for a model with a relatively weak central government and a strong federal 
state. Furthermore, the Turkish Cypriot party has time and again demanded a 
confederation.6 Apart from these fundamental differences there has been no 
agreement regarding the presence of Turkish troops or the possible return of the 
refugees. The settlement of mainland Turks who have moved to the island since 
1974 are equally controversial. The Greek side generally demands the withdrawal of 
the Turkish troops and settlers and wants an unrestricted return of all refugees; the 
Turkish Cypriot side pleads for a presence of Turkish troops and settlers and a very 
limited resettlement of Greek Cypriots, if at all. 
Major trust-building measures initiated by the UN so far could not be 
implemented. The status quo on Cyprus is marked by a geographical separation of 
the Turkish and Greek ethnic groups into mostly ethnically homogeneous areas. A 
buffer zone controlled by one of the oldest UN peacekeeping missions (UNICYP) 
divides the Greek Cypriot southern part of the island (Republic of Cyprus) from the 
Turkish Cypriot northern part (Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus - TRNC). There 
are almost no direct lines of communication between these two parts, nor any 
economic relationships. 
In 1990, the EU approved the application of the Cyprus Government for 
membership. Since then, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus has been invited 
to participate as part of the official Cypriot delegation at the acceleration talks. 
However, the North stated that it will only participate as an independent state. 
 
                                                           
6  Theophanous, Andreas, 1996: The Political Economy Of A Federal Cyprus. Nicosia: Intercollege Press. p. xiii.  
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
6 
2 The Development of the Trainer Group on the Background 
of the Cyprus Consortium and the US Network 
 
 
 
The bi-communal Conflict Resolution Trainer Group began to emerge in 1993 and 
took over two years to establish. It was the result of the co-operation between 
committed Cypriots as well as of foreign actors. They began as two separate groups 
in their respective communities (mono-communal phase) and developed into a 
group that met and acted on a bi-communal basis. 
From Spring 1995 onwards approximately 30 people of the Conflict Resolution 
Trainer Group began to initiate projects of their own and to establish new bi-
communal follow-up groups. By the end of 1997, there were 25 such groups and 
approximately 1,500 people had participated in bi-communal social activities.7  
The development leading to the foundation of the Conflict Resolution Trainer 
Group was initially strongly influenced by the personal commitment of certain 
individuals. During the mono-communal phase, there was no direct permanent 
contact between the future trainers on both sides. The participation of the foreign 
actors was strongly influenced by the personal commitment of Louise Diamond. 
Ms Diamond was first invited to Cyprus in 1992 by a Greek Cypriot woman 
residing in the US. The aim of this “fact finding mission” was to find out how much 
Ms. Diamond with her solid background as a trainer could contribute to the overall 
situation in Cyprus. For this purpose a series of informal talks were arranged with 
Greek and Turkish Cypriots who had previously taken part in Conflict Resolution 
Programmes.8 Apart from this there were discussions and consultations with leading 
representatives of the Cyprus Fulbright Commission, the American Center, the US 
Embassy, the United Nations on Cyprus and politicians from both sides. 
                                                           
7  See Appendix: Overview of the Group Development 
8  These were mostly initiatives by Ronald J. Fisher and Leonard Doob. Fisher, Ronald J, 1994: Education And 
Peacebuilding in Cyprus: A Report On Two Conflict Analysis Workshops, Saskatoon/ Canada: University of 
Saskatchewan (Dep. of Psychology). Doob, L.W., 1974: A Cyprus workshop: an exercise in intervention 
methodology, in: Journal of Social Psychology vol. 94, (1974), pp. 161 - 178. Doob, L.W., 1976: A Cyprus 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
7 
At that time, there were no bi-communal contacts on the societal level apart 
from the meetings in connection with the Nicosia Master Plan facilitated by UNHCR. 9 
There was a lot of interest shown by some individuals in a possible training in 
Conflict Resolution and Conflict Management. Due to this, Ms. Diamond and her 
colleague John McDonald (of the Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy, IMTD) and 
Members of the National Training Laboratories (NTL) regularly visited the island for 
the following two years. 10 The aim was to engender trust between the team of 
trainers and to present their methods by arranging lectures and conducting short 
workshops on issues of conflict management in both communities. All these 
activities happened in a mono-communal context. 
The audience consisted of individual Cypriots who were committed to 
furthering peace. The participants were selected mainly by Cypriots in co-operation 
with the US team of trainers and was influenced by their personal and social 
background and experience. On the Greek Cypriot side there was one person 
affiliated to the Peace Centre Cyprus, on the Turkish Cypriot side there developed 
two interested groups consisting of leftwing and rightwing intellectuals who dealt 
separately with the organisers of the events. This separation was abolished after 
about nine months when the team of trainers made it clear to the groups that they 
were not prepared any more to carry out two workshops with different participants 
within the Turkish Cypriot community. 11 Even though the atmosphere between the 
two Turkish Cypriot groups was tense and confrontational, both groups accepted the 
fusion because it was considered a disgrace not to meet the Greek Cypriots as a 
unified Turkish Cypriot group in a possible bi-communal workshop. The two Turkish 
Cypriot groups unified in a process that was described by some of the interviewees 
as “Conflict resolution in the community”: 
                                                                                                                                                            
workshop: intervention methodology during a continuing crisic, in: Journal of Social Psychology vol. 98 (1976), 
pp. 143 - 44. 
9  See UNDP, United Nations Development Programme (ed.), 1984: Nicosia Master Plan: Final Report Executive 
Summary. Nicosia: UNDP, UNCHS [Habitat].; UNHCR, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (ed.), 
1995: The Nicosia Sewage Project: A Plan For Nicosia A Strategy For The World. Nicosia: UNHCR.; UNHCR, United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (ed.): A Vision for the Future of Nicosia: A Partnership towards the 
Rehabilitation of Chrysaliniotissa and Arab Ahmet. Nicosia: UNHCR. 
10  There was a total of eight journeys, mostly financed by the IMTD. See Institute For Multi-Track Diplomacy (ed.), 
1995: Initiative Report: Cyprus, March 2, IMTD, Washington, D.C.. 
11  See Interview (1), (35). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
8 
“It was as powerful as the bi-communal workshop. (…) They [the 
participants] have known each other for years, but they had never sat 
down and talked and had never acknowledged their common ground. 
They had made many assumptions about one another and their political 
views and were shocked to find out that they actually believed a lot of 
the same things and had only marginal differences.” (35:1)12  
As a result of this workshop, the participants agreed to take part in a bi-communal 
workshop whose Turkish Cypriot participants consisted of politically leftwing and 
rightwing members equally. This could be considered an important condition for the 
bi-communal training. 
The interest in these workshops remained strong and this led to the first bi-
communal workshop in the second half of 1992 on initiative of the IMTD. By 
November 1992, the Bi-Communal Conflict Resolution Steering Comittee (BSC) was 
founded as a direct result of a bi-communal workshop. 13 This meant that from then 
on there was an informal bi-communal committee organised by civilians which 
marked the beginning of the bi-communal phase leading to the development of the 
Trainer Group. 
The Bi-Communal Steering Committee (BSC) had twelve members, six Greek 
Cypriot and six Turkish Cypriot participants of the workshops. It took on the task of 
co-ordinating all bi-communal peace building activities on Cyprus. At the time of its 
foundation this meant mainly the organisation and planning of Conflict Resolution 
Workshops, facilitated by the Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy (IMTD) and the 
National Training Laboratories (NTL). While the development of the contents was the 
responsibility of the American Trainers, it was the aim of the BSC to recruit new 
interested participants for the training programme. 
In the summer of 1993, the IMTD and the NTL organised a ten day intensive 
training in conflict resolution in Oxford, England. This workshop proved important in 
several aspects. For one thing, it created a close personal relationship between the 
twenty participants. These participants called themselves “The Oxford Group” and 
after their return to Cyprus started meeting in the buffer zone. After only a few 
                                                           
12  The first figure indicates the number of the interview. 
13  Bicommunal Conflict Resolution Steering Committee Cyprus (ed.), April 1995: Profile. Nicosia.  
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
9 
meetings the Greek Cypriot TV station Antenna IV broadcast a very negative report 
about the bi-communal meetings and accused the participants of making political 
concessions and conducting underhand negotiations. For several days the bi-
communal contacts were dominating the news until the Greek Cypriot participants 
could refute the criticism by making public statements. This resulted in a lot of 
publicity for the new bi-communal activities. More and more individuals were aware 
of them and expressed an interest in participating. 
The Oxford Workshop, the positive response of its participants and the 
successful dealing with the public attacks from within the Greek Cypriot society also 
meant a turning point for the American trainers because they managed to pave the 
way for continuous finance for the training on Cyprus. Both, the participants and the 
circle of foreign actors evaluated the workshop positively. Because of this, the 
Cyprus Fulbright Commission decided to continue their work by emphasising their 
commitment to bi-communal civic contacts and talks. As a reaction to the Oxford 
Workshop the Cyprus Fulbright Commission and Amideast requested major funding 
for additional training in conflict resolution on Cyprus. In response to that request 
IMTD, NTL and CMG formed the Cyprus Consortium. Until than, CMG had not been 
involved in projects on Cyprus but when Amideast offered funding they considered 
an engagement on the island. The initiative to co-operate came from Louse Diamond 
and was motivated to avoid competition in attempt to secure funding. Since IMTD 
and CMG draw on different approaches in terms of conflict resolution and conflict 
management their trainers had to meet for several days in order to synthesise a 
common approach for the “Cyprus Conflict Management Project”. As expected, the 
Consortium got the go ahead for the project which was sponsored by the Fulbright 
Commission and funded by the US Agency for International Development through 
Amideast. 
In 1994, the Cyprus Consortium conducted eight training sessions for over 200 
participants.14 One workshop was for Cypriot students participating in the Cyprus 
American Scholarship Program (CASP). There were also three courses held for CASP 
                                                           
14  To get a more detailed view of the goals of facilitators and participants see: Rothman, Jay: Articulating Goals and 
Monitoring Progress in a Cyprus Conflict Resolution Training Workshop, in: Marc Ross / Jay Rothman, 1999: 
Theory and Practice in Ethnic Conflict Management: Theorizing Success and Failure, London Macmillan Press, pp. 
176 – 194. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
10 
alumni, two for project leaders involved in bi-communal activities and one included 
forty public leaders in a workshop in Coolfont, Virginia. Of particular importance in  
the development of the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group as an internal peace 
building actor was the Training of Trainers-Workshop which included individuals 
from the Oxford Workshop and those who expressed an interest after the hysterical 
public media campaign. When the Cyprus Consortium received a second grant from 
Amideast and the Cyprus Fulbright Commission for the period 1995-98, a workshop 
“Advanced Training for Trainers” was held. Since the number of bi-communal groups 
increased continuously, another “Training of Trainers” workshop was held in 
October 1997 with 25 more people who were to support the existing Conflict 
Resolution Trainer Group. Altogether six workshops were funded by the second 
grant including two for CASP-students in 1995 and 1997, a summer camp for Cypriot 
teenagers in the US, a workshop for political leaders and one for Greek and Turkish 
Cypriot educators. 
Additionally, the Cyprus Consortium received a grant from the Carnegie 
Corporation to set up a study group for policy leaders dealing with the issue of 
“intractability”. From this group, which dissolved in 1998, the Harvard study group 
evolved. Both groups can be considered as a “track-one-and-half” initiative 
unrelated to the activities of the Trainer Group or the follow-up groups. 
The activities of the Cyprus Consortium were important for the development of 
the Trainer Group as an internal actor as it had created a pool of qualified trainers in 
conflict resolution by their workshops “Training for Trainers”. Apart from this, the 
other courses and workshops favoured the development of the bi-communal civic 
groups as interested participants could join the local groups after their return to 
Cyprus. Although it was not a structured process, the training programme had 
kindled a general interest for conflict resolution and bi-communal activities. 
One of the major disadvantages of the Cyprus Consortium was that none of its 
member organisation was represented on the island permanently. This lead to an 
empowerment of local activists in the sense of skill building but for the development 
of a competent internal actor it needed a group building process which was not 
facilitated by the Consortium. This function was taken over by another actor, the 
Scholars of the Cyprus Fulbright Commission. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
11 
In order to understand the development of the Trainer Group and their method 
of dealing with existing obstacles it is necessary to understand the structure of the 
foreign support organisations. 
With the emergence of the Cyprus Consortium an informal network of 
American actors was formed which supported the Trainer Group in their attempts to 
implement peace building projects. These were the Cyprus Consortium, the 
American Embassy in Nicosia, the American Center in Nicosia, the Cyprus Fulbright 
Commission and the Resident Scholar of the Fulbright Commission. 
Although a hierarchy exists between the institutional state and non-state 
actors as well as between the Fulbright Commission and the scholars employed by 
them every single one of the network actors has a high degree of autonomy for his 
actions. In regard to the bi-communal involvement there is no such thing as formal 
obedience and a hierarchy of order. According to the interviewees, there was rather 
a feeling of “we Americans”. This is confirmed by the external observers who 
actually talk of the “American family” or “the Americans” 15 on Cyprus. In regard to 
the bi-communal activities the individual networks frequently exchange information. 
This is done in a formalised way (such as in meetings or by distributing lists of bi-
communal activities that have happened) as well as in many informal encounters. 
The informal character of the network is illuminated when one considers that for 
example the Special Assistant for Bi-communal Affairs of the US Embassy is married 
to the Director of the American Center. 
This tight network of personal relationships resulted in a more or less holistic 
view of the problems by the interviewed members of the US network involved in the 
realisation of bi-communal activities. The speakers proved well informed about their 
respective network colleagues independent of their organisation.  
There are some obstacles for societal bi-communal groups to an extent that 
can not be overcome by the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group as an internal actor 
alone. Furthermore, they are of a nature and degree of complexity that they require 
multi-functional actions by the supporting actor. The study will show that the 
American network on Cyprus is capable of such a multiple function that requires a 
high degree of exchange and co-operation. The actors of the American network are 
                                                           
15  See Interviews (7), (11), (30), (33), (34), (36), (37), (38), (39), (41), (42), (43), (44), (45). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
12 
capable of that, however, even a multi-functional actor like the American network on 
Cyprus has its limits.  
The American network in the sense of an actor supporting bi-communal 
activities is the result of a developmental process. We can assume that even before 
the emergence of the Trainer Group and its follow-up groups there was a network of 
American organisations in Nicosia. The conscious intention to engage in bi-
communal activities on a societal level only developed with the commitment of the 
Fulbright Commission and its co-operation with the Cyprus Consortium. Another 
indication of its increasing identification as an actor is the creation of positions 
dealing with bi-communal activities. Within the network, three types of positions 
have been created dealing full time with bi-communal activities and issues, namely 
the positions of Secretary in the Fulbright Commission, the position of the Fulbright 
Scholar that is also referred to as the “Field Practitioner” as well as the Special 
Assistant for Bi-communal Affairs at the US Embassy. 
The relationship between the Fulbright Commission and the Conflict 
Resolution Trainer Group and its follow-up groups is very complex. As the resident 
Scholar has been the focus for the local activists of the Trainer Group for years, he is 
the personification of the relationship between the internal and external actors. 
 
 
 
2.1 The Trainer Group as an Internal Actor 
 
Between 1994 and the summer of 1995 thirteen Greek and Turkish Cypriots from the 
aforementioned pool of trainers took part in a Design Workshop facilitated by 
Fulbright Resident Scholar Benjamin J. Broome with the aim of developing concepts 
for future peace building measures on Cyprus. In this workshop, the interactive 
management approach was applied, a problem solving approach which enabled 
groups to come to a consensus even on complex issues. The nine months long 
workshop was a process that can be separated into three phases: During the first 
phase, the participants achieved a shared understanding of the structures of 
obstacles for peace building projects on Cyprus. The second phase meant a 
development of a collective Statement of Visions in regard to the aims of the peace 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
13 
building process. The third phase was marked by the development of projects, 
concepts and ideas to enhance the realisation of the Vision Statement. 
Soon afterwards the group started referring to itself as the Conflict Resolution 
Trainer Group. During the next nine months it developed into a permanent working 
group of trainers that became the initiator for a series of peace building measures. 
The Broome workshop had three aims: 
• To serve as the framework for the Trainer Group and to enable the planning of 
concepts and projects for future peace building measures. 
• The team spirit of the group was to be enhanced and encouraged in order to 
guarantee the implementation of the planned peace building measures. 
• It served as a place for further learning and supplemented the initial training. 
Within the framework of the Broome workshop the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group 
worked out two hundred and forty-one possible peace building projects out of which 
fifteen were finally accepted as projects to be implemented. 16 These projects were 
chosen according to the criteria of expected feasibility, which means, they seemed 
to be possible from the group perspective as well as under the given social 
conditions. Mid 1995 the group presented its fifteen projects publicly at a “bazaar” 
(Agora bazar ) with the aim of recruiting more participants for them. 
 
 
 
2.2 The First Phase of Proliferation 
 
The consolidation of the bi-communal Conflict Resolution Trainer Group was the 
beginning of the first phase of projects and proliferation that lasted until the violent 
inter-communal incidents in the summer of 1996. 
                                                           
16  See Broome, Benjamin J., 1996: Designing the Future of Peace-Building Efforts in Cyprus - Report of Design 
Workshop held during Fall 1994 and Spring of 1995 with Conflict Resolution Trainers and Project Leaders. 
Available from the Cyprus Fulbright Commission, Nicosia. Broome, Benjamin J., 1997: Designing a Collective 
Approach to Peace: Interactive Design and Problem-Solving Workshop with Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot 
Communities in Cyprus, in: International Negotiation vol. 2, no. 3, 1997, pp. 381 - 407. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
14 
The planning of the mentioned fifteen peace building measures by the group 
rang in a new phase in the shaping of societal bi-communal relations. While until 
June 1995 the majority of bi-communal events were arranged by or with the help of 
foreign facilitators, from then on the Trainer Group became a separate, individual 
initiating force. The creation of new bi-communal follow-up groups by the Trainer 
Group was of particular importance for this development. 
We can pinpoint three different origins of these newly founded groups that 
alone illuminate the distinctive job sharing between the Trainer Group and the 
foreign actors supporting it. 
• Follow-up groups that were initiated by the Trainer Group with the 
participation of the Cyprus Consortium, 
• Follow-up groups that were initiated by the Trainer Group exclusively, 
• Follow-up groups that were initiated by the respective Scholar of the Fulbright 
Commission with the participation of the Trainer Group. 
In spite of their training as conflict resolution trainers the participants were not at 
ease with the thought of holding bi-communal workshops on their own now and 
facilitating bi-communal groups. The first two workshops were held by a bi-
communal team of trainers under the observation and supervision of the Cyprus 
Consortium. Those workshops were a success and the participants decided to meet 
regularly as a group in the buffer zone. These were the corner stones for the 
Educators Group and the Citizen Group - the first follow-up groups which were 
looked after and facilitated by the Trainer Group. Once the ice was broken, the 
confidence of the trainers in their abilities increased and further workshops and new 
groups followed without the participation of the Consortium. 
The forming of new groups by the resident Fulbright Scholar followed a similar 
pattern because the groups constituted themselves as a follow-up to workshops. 
Those groups were referred to as “track-one-and-a-half” groups by the interviewees 
and other insiders. 17 They were supervised by the Fulbright Scholar, and a Greek 
Cypriot and a Turkish Cypriot trainer were integrated as facilitators. 
                                                           
17  These were: Young Political Leaders Group, Young Business Leaders Group, Women Group, University Students 
and later in 1997 the Environmental Group. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
15 
According to the analysis, the Trainer Group did not manage to integrate 
groups into the bi-communal process who were close to the political establishment 
on both sides - probably because of their social status and very likely because of 
their tendency to left-wing political orientation. This task was taken on by the 
Fulbright Commission which was perceived in an academic role and in regard to the 
Cypriot political orientation as a “neutral” actor. Apart from that, the Fulbright 
Commission enjoys a unique (legal) status in today’s Cyprus. Its foundation in 1962 
happened before  the inter-communal unrest of 1963 and before  the dissolution of 
the bi-communal constitution. Its board consists of Greek and Turkish Cypriots and it 
maintains offices in both parts of the island. Grants have been given to students in 
both communities all along, and both communities were involved in the academic 
exchange with the US. This makes it the only bi-communal organisation  on Cyprus 
to this day. The results of this are that the participation in one of the bi-communal 
groups initiated by the Fulbright Commission or facilitated by their Scholar is legally 
and symbolically safe for people in public life (and those who aspire to it). Decades 
of work have created a large number of personal relationships between the political 
establishment of the North and the South and the Cyprus Fulbright Commission. It is 
also of importance in regard to educational grants for their own children. As a result 
of this, the new groups founded by the Fulbright Commission are able to start on a 
higher societal level than the ones funded by the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group. 
To put it simply: An invitation by the Fulbright Commission which, in addition, has 
the official or unofficial support of the American embassy and the American Center 
cannot be ignored easily on Cyprus. 
The distinction between groups founded by the Fulbright Commission and the 
ones created by the Trainer Group is not totally clear cut. The co-operative 
relationship between the two kinds of groups is recognisable by the shared 
facilitation. Apart from this, when groups are initiated by the Fulbright Scholar it is 
always discussed with the Trainer Group beforehand. This, among other things, has 
the result that the interviewees often don´t make any distinction between the new 
groups but rather consider them altogether as part of the growing “bi-communal 
process” or the “bi-communal movement”. It is also common that trainers refer to all 
existing groups as “ours”. International observers, however, tend to refer to them 
globally as “Fulbright groups” and neglect the activities of the local trainers.  
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
16 
The bi-communal follow-up groups usually meet every two to three weeks. 
Within the first phase of proliferation the follow-up bi-communal groups were 
formed by the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group: the Educator´s Group, the Citizens 
Group, the Federation and EU Study Group, Peace Concert, and the Cultural Evening 
Planning group, the “Letters to the Other Side” group and the “Technology for 
Peace” project group, the Management Group, the Women Group, Young Political 
Leaders, Young Business Leaders, Students I and the Lawyers group. Usually 
approximately 200 Cypriots were members in these bi-communal groups. 
 
 
 
2.3 The Temporary Disruption of Activities 
 
The violent events in the buffer zone in August 1996 put an end to all bi-communal 
activities. Greek Cypriot bikers broke through the barricades of the police and the 
UN-peace keeping soldiers, the “Blue Helmets“ and invaded the buffer zone near 
Derinya to get into the northern part of the island. During this event a Greek Cypriot 
was beaten to death by Turkish and Turkish Cypriot “counter demonstrators“. A few 
days later another Island Greek was shot by Turkish or Turkish Cypriot soldiers while 
attempting to rip the Turkish Cypriot flag from the mast. These incidents caused an 
outcry in the Greek Cypriot community. Demonstrations on the Greek Cypriot side 
prevented all meetings of the bi-communal groups.  
Furthermore, the Turkish Cypriot government cloesd off all crossings to the 
southern part of the island. One of the trainers remembers: 
“I remember when I watched the events and was pulling my hair and 
said: All the work we have done in the last five years went down the 
drain. By reason of one effect [event].“ (30:11)  
Even in this situation the members of the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group could 
agree they wanted to give signals of reconciliation. Direct communication between 
the members was impossible and during the whole phase could only happen via the 
Fulbright Scholar Benjamin Broome. However, the international community and the 
United Nations on Cyprus could be convinced that in both communities there was a 
pool of people who were prepared to make a reconciliatory statement opposing 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
17 
violence and the hateful propaganda of both sides. This lead to a bi-communal 
reception by the United Nations in the Ledra Palace on September 30
th
 1996 
attended by nearly four hundred people from both sides of the island. The guests 
consisted of activists and participants of the groups described as well as of the 
experts and professional groups of the Nicosia Master Plan. This meeting, in a 
generally friendly and relaxed atmosphere, was considered visible evidence by the 
participants for the possibility of a peaceful rapproachment and equally impressed 
the diplomats and representatives of the United Nations present. 
While the demonstration by the bikers and their violent invasion of the buffer 
zone and the brutal murders were perceived as a sign of an escalation of the Cyprus 
Conflict by the rest of the world, the peaceful bi-communal meeting of Greek and 
Turkish Cypriots went largely unnoticed by the world press. The same evening the 
representative of the United Nations Peace Keeping Force on Cyprus decided to 
celebrate the anniversary of the United Nations, October 24
th
 1996, with a big bi-
communal event. There was little time to prepare the reception for one thousand five 
hundred guests – people involved in bi-communal activities as well as supporters. 
All in all three thousand Cypriots registered their interest in being invited which 
demonstrated a willingness for meetings and communication that had been 
considered impossible only a few weeks before. Apart from this successful event 
there were hardly any bi-communal meetings or activities on the civic level, as the 
authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus did not grant any permits to 
the buffer zone to Turkish Cypriot activists. 
 
 
 
2.4 The Second Phase of Proliferation 
 
The second phase of projects and proliferation commenced in March 1997 when the 
Turkish authorities lifted the blockade against bi-communal meetings and again 
allowed entry to the buffer zone. The end of the Turkish Cypriot blockade was the 
result of an increased political involvement by the American government in the 
Cyprus Conflict which put more pressure on both Cypriot governments. Even more 
diplomatic activities were triggered by the announcement by President Clerides in 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
18 
January 1997 that Russian S-300 rockets were to be stationed on the island. When 
new inter-communal talks were announced on a political level, the Turkish Cypriot 
government lifted the blockade. 
The possibility of further meetings initiated a whole series of projects and the 
formation of numerous new groups. During the second phase of proliferation the 
following groups were founded: the Citizens Group II-VII, the Brussels Women 
Group, the Students Group II, the Co-Villager Project, Youth Encounters for Peace, 
Young Environmentalists, the Hade Magazine, the Artists Group, the Federalism 
Group and the Environmental Group. In addition, new forms of cross-visits were 
conducted.18  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 The Dialogue in the Bi-Communal Groups 
 
 
 
The Trainer Group developed a network of twenty-five (informal) bi-communal 
citizens groups. One of their aims was the training of conflict resolution techniques 
and the initiation of a “deep dialogue” between the members. Deep Dialogue was 
characterized by the steps “listening – understanding – acknowledging”. 
For many Cypriots the first encounter and the following exchange between 
people of a different community is an important intellectual and emotional event. 
For the first time within the parameters of a facilitated dialogue there is the 
opportunity to listen to the point of view of the other community in regard to historic 
events of the conflict as well as to contemporary issues. At the same time, the 
dialogue offers the chance to communicate one‘s own opinions and attitudes to the 
other group. 
                                                           
18  See Appendix: Overview of the Group Development 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
19 
In this case study we cannot deal with the processes of the individual bi-
communal groups in detail.19 On the whole we can say that the Trainer Group did not 
have a unified, overall method of training or facilitation. It was rather that the 
individual members developed their own style based on the training by the Cyprus 
Consortium and further input by some Fulbright Scholars. In spite of that there are 
some basic rules which were applied in all follow-up groups. These are: individuality 
of the participants, who are only allowed to speak for themselves, informality of 
encounters which means that none of the participants is present in his or her official-
professional function, confidentiality, consensual voting and mutual respect. 
The author came to the conclusion that the bi-communal teams of trainers 
managed to a great extent to initiate a deep dialogue between the participants. We 
would like to mention as one indicator the enhanced scope for action by the groups 
based on this dialogue, as well as the sustainability of the civic groups even in times 
of violence like the summer of 1996. The quality of the dialogue is clearly connected 
to the willingness to co-operate. Only after the steps listening, understanding and 
acknowledging have been tackled, the group is able to implement certain projects, 
as will be shown below. 
On the contrary, it is very difficult to initiate a deep-dialogue on the level of a 
track-one-and-a-half group. Participants do not accept basic rules of the conflict 
resolution approach like speeking in their private capacity. The view expressed by 
one participant is more the rule than the exception. 
“I am there as an individual but they take my statements as a political 
leader. So it is useless to say I am there as an individual.” (46:12) 
There is a clear and open mistrust against the presence of an American facilitator 
because it is feared that the expressed views could become part of the official 
negotiation process via the US network. The local co-trainers did not do better than 
the facilitating Fulbright scholar because they were perceived as a part of the 
network. This does not mean that there is no learning-process on behalf of the 
participants. The above speaker considered the process as helpful. However, it is 
                                                           
19  See Broome, Benjamin J., 1998: Overview of Conflict Resolution Activities in Cyprus: Their Contribution To The 
Peace Process, in: The Cyprus Review vol. 10, no. 1., Spring 1998, pp. 47 - 66. Hadjipavlou-Trigeorgis, Maria, 
1993: Unofficial Intercommunal Contacts and their Contribution to Peacebuilding in Conflict Societies: The Case 
of Cyprus, in: The Cyprus Review  vol. 5, no. 2, 1993, pp. 68 - 87. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
20 
very doubtful that any kind of acknowledging or deep dialogue is taking place. 
Consequently no common projects are being developed or implemented by this 
group.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 The Structure of the Bi-Communal Groups 
 
 
 
Before we examine the obstacles the Trainer Group encountered in setting up the bi-
communal process it is important to have a look at the structure of the bi-communal 
groups. The pattern of the groups and the rules by which they function are closely 
connected to the structure of the Cyprus Conflict. In other words, to a large degree 
the groups are reflecting the “unwritten rules” of the Cyprus Conflict. These criteria 
are: Bi-communality, equal representation of communities, informality, the inclusion 
of leftwing and rightwing political orientations, English as the working language and 
the equal participation of men and women. For the overwhelming number of 
interviewees these criteria are personally relevant (internal dimension) but there is 
also some kind of direct or indirect social control which makes ignoring these criteria 
very difficult or even impossible (external dimension) The acceptance of these 
criteria enables peace-building activities but they are also a hindrance as they limit 
the scope of possible actions. 
Let me explain the internal and external dimensions by the example of equal 
representation of communities. The criteria of “equal numbers” means the factual 
equality and equal treatment of the participants from both communities. On an inter-
group level it means that the group based on equal representation above all gives 
the Turkish Cypriots a space in which to feel safe and where it is not the dominated 
or defeated minority. This feeling of safety is of personal importance for many 
Turkish Cypriots and it is doubtful whether they would participate in a process in 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
21 
which this would not be guaranteed. At the same time there is also a level of 
external control. 
“All this workshop the participants have equal number. So, Denktash 
and our government can´t criticise us. ´You are going and you accept 
minority rights´, etc.” (1:52)  
For the Turkish Cypriot authorities an unbalanced representation would be a 
violation of their demand for political equality and for the acceptance as an equal 
community and not as a minority. Even a symbolic violation of this criteria would 
most certainly lead to political reactions and endanger any further participation of 
the Turkish Cypriots. At the same time the criterium of equal numbers is an obstacle 
for the bi-communal groups as they are forced to grow accordingly and are 
consequently always depending on the smaller partner. For example, in the North 
more women are organised than in the South, and sometimes they felt noticeably 
hindered by the principle of equal numbers. Apart from that, in regard to the marked 
difference in population in both communities, for the people of the north a 
noticeably higher degree of mobilisation was necessary. 
Each of the criteria mentioned above implies its specific limitations. On the 
Turkish side, bi-communality symbolizes renewed equality of both communities. At 
the same time it emphasises the emancipation and the enhancement of their status 
as the Turkish Cypriot community as a separate group from the rest of the Turkish 
population in the North and the influence of “Big Brother” Turkey. The exclusion of 
people originating from mainland Turkey has a highly symbolic meaning for island 
Greeks. The inclusion of mainland Turks would result in a massive refusal by the 
Greek Cypriot society as the question of Turkish settlements in the North is 
politically highly controversial and explosive. On the other hand, the actual 
involvement of immigrant mainland Turks in “bi-communal” activities would be 
interpreted as an indirect acceptance by the Turkish Cypriot government of their 
policy of settlement. 
For that reason it constitutes a strong obstacle for the Trainer Group and their 
follow-up groups because a process of social reconcilitation with the Turks in the 
North who either immigrated or are settled there does not seem possible. 
Considering that approximately 50% of the people living in the North are of Turkish 
origin this is not a negligible restriction. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
22 
There are some characteristics unconnected to the structure of the Cyprus 
Conflict and the positions of the leading negotiators. This concerns English as the 
group language. In the same vein, the parity between men and woman mirrors the 
internal values of the founders of the groups. Still, they can impair the scope of the 
internal peace building actors. English as the language of communiction has an 
impact on the composition and the social scope of the bi-communal groups as only 
members of the educated middle class can be integrated. 
Another point of interest is the criteria of left-wing and right-wing 
participation. This applies to the integration of people of left-wing and right-wing 
political parties as members of bi-communal groups. According to the analysis the 
left-right participation is not so much a criteria of the grassroots groups on Track-
Two level but rather for the groups of track one-and-a-half facilitated by the 
Fulbright Scholar. Furthermore, it is also of greater importance for the composition 
of the Turkish-Cypriot participants. 
There are indicators that the realisation of a left-right equality is easier for the 
foreign actors than for local ones. The formal party-political neutrality of the foreign 
actor enhances his scope of action. The reunification of this internal political conflict 
group seems to be difficult for internal actors as they are either aligned to a political 
party or perceived as such.  
The indicators for group building are influenced by the positions of the 
conflicting parties on the peacemaking level. There seem to be two motives for the 
forming and keeping of characteristics. There is a level of personal internalization as 
well as a level of external control. 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
23 
5 Obstacles for the Bi-Communal Process 
 
 
 
There are two mayor factors obstructing the bicommunal process: self-restriction 
and repression. The term self-restriction on the one hand means the omission of an 
act of behaviour in a conscious and self-determined way. On the other hand, self-
restriction can also be a reaction to some anticipated criticism or risk. In the case of 
the former an omission of an action such as “crossing the border” has the 
characteristic of a voluntary boycott, while the second form of omission would 
happen for fear of possible negative reactions. This fear on the side of the person 
exerting self-restriction corresponds to a successful deterrent on the side of those 
who want to prevent a crossing. Both motives are present on Cyprus. Often the non-
action by an individual is influenced by both kinds so it is impossible to clearly 
determine the contributing factors or to assess them. 
All attempts by governmental and non-governmental organisations that try to 
prevent legal acts such as entering the buffer zone often by violent measures, 
intimidations, threats and hindrance are considered a repression. 
 
 
 
5.1 Obstacles in the Context of Encounters 
 
Contacts and encounters between members of the conflicting parties are the basic 
conditions of every peace building approach. In this study we define bi-communal 
encounters as the physical meeting of people from both island communities. We will 
not be evaluating the contents of these encounters but rather aim to analyse those 
factors that hinder the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group in organising bi-communal 
encounters by, for example, making the crossing difficult or completely preventing it. 
For that we contrast the most frequent patterns of explanation in both communities 
in regard to bi-communal meetings. The questions are: How open are the check-
points on Cyprus? What are the reasons for their impenetrability? A realistic 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
24 
explanation of the reasons for impenetrability is the basis for an analysis of the 
encounter-based peacebuilding activities of internal and foreign actors. 
We have to differentiate between two forms of encounters on Cyprus. A 
crossing  means that individuals move from the North to the South and vice versa. 
The person leaves the legal territory of his or her community or state and enters the 
legal territory of the other community. When they meet in the middle it means that 
both parties leave their legal territory and meet in a place that belongs to neither 
territory. This could be the buffer zone under control of the United Nations or an 
encounter abroad. 
While the crossing is an act of self-determination of the respective persons 
and parties, the meeting in the middle is a form of encounter that at least on Cyprus 
requires the involvement of a foreign actor. If a crossing is not possible or does not 
appear to be possible, the only alternative is a meeting in the middle. 
A checkpoint exists in a continuum of openness and limitations. It is an offer 
to cross as well as a place of possible selection of the people crossing expressed in 
the refusal of the passing permit to certain groups or individuals. To illustrate the 
process of encounters it is necessary to deal with the geographical conditions of the 
crossing points and the places of encounter taking as an example the Checkpoint 
Ledra Palace in Nicosia. 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
25 
Table 1: Ledra Palace Checkpoint 
 
 
Nicosia-North 
Nicosia-South 
UN Bufferzone Ledra 
Palace 
U N 
T C 
U N 
G C 
 
New Fulbright 
 
 
 
Persons crossing from the South to the North from the Greek Cypriot side have to 
pass a checkpoint of the Greek Cypriot police. Only a few meters later they enter the 
buffer zone. After approximately 50 meters and behind destroyed and empty houses 
is the new building of the Fulbright Commission (New Fulbright) and the Ledra 
Palace Hotel, the residence of the United Nations. A short distance behind the Ledra 
Palace Hotel a UN-guard is positioned as an observer. When leaving the buffer zone 
one enters the Northern parts of Nicosia and passes a Turkish Cypriot checkpoint. 
On leaving this checkpoint the crossing ends. The distance covered is approximately 
250 meters. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
26 
In the case of meeting in the middle one does not pass the UN guard but turns 
off to the left to the building of the Fulbright Commission or to the Ledra Palace 
Hotel. 
When crossing over, the members of the Trainer Group encounter two obstacles 
based on two factors, self-restriction and repression. These factors don’t bear the 
same relevance for the sub-groups of the Trainer Group. 
The overriding rule of avoiding an “implicit recognition” of the North makes a 
crossing for a Greek Cypriot into the Turkish Cypriot North very problematic. 
Avoiding any implicit recognition means that nothing should be done that could be 
interpreted as an indirect recognition of the other´s legality as a state. On their way 
from the South to the North particularly Greek Cypriots seemingly have to act in a 
way that recognizes the Turkish Cypriot state that in their mind does not exist. For 
that reason Greek Cypriots refuse to cross (self-restriction).20 
In contrast to this there is no recognizable self-restriction among the Turkish 
Cypriot members of the Trainer Group because they do not question the existence of 
a Greek-Cypriot state in principle but there are very serious obstacles put up by their 
government and authorities that have an impact on them. None of the sub-groups of 
the Trainer Group is – though for different reasons - able to cross over individually to 
take part in a bi-communal encounter. The Greek Cypriot members refuse to cross 
under the existing conditions, and the Turkish Cypriot members are prevented from 
doing it. Without the support of foreign actors, bi-communal meetings of the Trainer 
Group are impossible. 
This clarification of the actual reasons for the lack of crossings enables us to 
focus on realistic measures of support for internal actors as well as the Trainer 
Group. In regard to the scope of action for foreign actors working on the possibility 
that people from both sides can meet, it means that they have to deal with the 
problems of self-restriction and the external restrictions of their freedom of 
movement. Both problems require very different measures of support and 
intervention on the part of the foreign actors which will be analysed in the following. 
                                                           
20  Regarding the concept of “implicit recognition“ see Oliver Wolleh, Cyprus: A Civil Society Caught up in the 
Question of Recognition, in: European Platform for Conflict Prevention and Transformation (ed.), Searching for 
Peace in Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, to be published in June 2001.; Wolleh, Oliver, 1998: 
Gesellschaftliche Vertrauensbildung: Über die schwierige Anerkennung in Zypern, in: Gewaltfreie Aktion , Heft 
115/116, 30. Jahrg., 1. + 2. Quartal 1998. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
27 
5.2 Counterbalancing Interventions in the Context of Encounters 
 
The complexity of the obstacles of self-restriction and repression means that they 
are not easily overcome by the members of the Trainer Group. This leads to a multi-
layered co-operation between the foreign parties. In regard to bi-communal 
encounters these activities of the foreign actors are Good Offices, Bypass Activities 
and Political Pressure. Good Offices describe the provision of an infrastructure 
suitable for an encounter. A Bypass Activity we call all actions that are aimed at 
enabling the internal actor (the Trainer Group and the bi-communal follow-up 
groups) to avoid an obstacle. Bypassing is a kind of problem avoidance. Other than 
with successful political influence the obstacle remains. It does not get removed or 
transformed, only bypassed. Political pressure is the attempt by a party to remove 
external obstacles and restrictions of direct encounters by influencing the persons 
responsible. 
 
 
5.2.1 Meeting in the Middle 
 
Meeting in the middle describes the encounter in a place which is not under the 
control and the laws of one of the two conflicting parties. On Cyprus, for the majority 
of cases, this means a meeting in the buffer zone controlled by the United Nations. 
The existence of a place like the buffer zone has various advantages for crossings. 
As described previously, the crossing is an encounter which for the island Greeks 
implies clear self-restriction and is therefore a disadvantage. By meeting in the 
buffer zone the Greeks can avoid the checkpoint procedures of the Turkish Republic 
of Northern Cyprus. This results in the overwhelming majority of bi-communal 
encounters on Cyprus happening in the buffer zone. 
In regard to the Good Offices, the necessary space is provided at the UN base 
Ledra Palace. This is the most common contribution of the United Nations to all 
kinds of bi-communal encounters. As the three rooms in the Ledra Palace available 
for bi-communal activities are not sufficient because of the growing numbers of the 
groups, the Cyprus Fulbright Commission erected a new building in 1997 (New 
Fulbright) next to the Ledra Palace in which four further rooms are available. Apart 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
28 
from this, the New Fulbright has telephone connections to the North and South, 
copiers and fax machines. This means that the Trainer Group, for the first time, had 
some technical equipment at its disposal. This was not available in the rooms at the 
Ledra Palace, as they were used for other events as well, e.g. press conferences, and 
a permanent use by the Trainer Group was not possible. The new Fulbright building 
provides them with an infrastructure that to a degree is appropriate to the growing 
number of bi-communal groups. 
So far neither the Greek Cypriots nor the Turkish Cypriots have been prepared 
to maintain a place of encounter in the buffer zone or to participate financially in the 
costs of the new infrastructure.21 The Greek Cypriot government refuses to establish 
a meeting place because they fear that this could amount to a legalisation of the 
buffer zone. Meeting in the middle is considered a symbolic abandonment of the 
demand for freedom of movement on the whole island. The status quo would lose 
some of its provisional character. The meeting of large parts of the population in the 
buffer zone would meet the need of many island Greeks for visits and encounters 
and diminish the urgency for an overall solution. 22 The Turkish Cypriot government 
does not seem to display any, or only a limited, detectable interest in encounters 
that don‘t implicitly demand an acceptance of their political existence.23 
Apart from the Ledra Palace Hotel there are a few other places for bi-
communal encounters, such as the offices of the UNHCR in the buffer zone or the 
village of Pyla, also in the buffer zone, which is inhabited by island Greeks and 
Turks. Pyla in the East is only of limited importance for the bi-communal societal 
groups as it is relatively remote and there are no suitable rooms for meetings. So the 
United Nations and the Fulbright Commission and their Good Offices supply the 
basic conditions for continuous social bi-communal encounters on Cyprus. 
Surprisingly, the importance of the buffer zone as a place of safety is not 
mentioned any more in the interviews of 1997. This can be explained by the fact that 
for the members of the bi-communal groups, especially the Trainer Group, its 
function as a safety zone had vanished into the background and one had got used to 
the presence of the United Nations. 
                                                           
21  See Interview (35). 
22  See Interview (33:20). 
23  See Interview (33:21). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
29 
It can be argued that without the existence of a neutral space such as the 
buffer zone, direct encounters between Greek and Turkish Cypriots on the civic level 
would be impossible, as the only other alternative would be crossings. In this sense 
the meeting in the middle gives the internal actors more scope for activities. At the 
same time this form of encounter is restrictive as it appears artificial and the place 
offers only limited possibilities for actions. Some of the hindrances – such as very 
few rooms for meetings - could be removed by the foreign parties. But meeting in 
the middle also means some restrictions that could not be compensated. One of the 
Greek Cypriot trainers criticises: 
“I think that Ledra Palace is an artificial place. That just empowers the 
division. And the division is not only on the land, the division is first in 
your minds and hearts. So, I believe that when people move back and 
forth they create a new energy, a new momentum of people’s movement 
on the island. And second, they see how the others are. What are the 
conditions? What is the environment? What are the attitudes? And I 
think it contributes to our knowledge more than just being restricted to 
that damned place. Also, it is the opportunity to behave more naturally. 
(…) And I think that’s how people should be how they deserve to be and 
not be dealt with as experimental elements of whatever.” (32:2) 
The detachedness of the bi-communal places of encounter (Ledra Palace, New 
Fulbright) can be experienced by every visitor who enters the building from between 
the destroyed houses and overgrown gardens. The place lends itself to 
communication and dialogue, but shared actions are impossible as it is so far 
removed from all social life. This applies even more to the rooms at the Ledra Palace 
than to ones in the New Fulbright. The new building of the Fulbright Commission is 
well equipped (telephone, fax, pc, TV) which enables the Trainer Group a better 
organisation and communication with their environment. The rooms at the Ledra 
Palace don’t offer those opportunities. 
 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
30 
5.2.2 “Easy Access” Interventions 
 
The term “easy access” was locally coined and is used by the Greek Cypriot 
members of the bi-communal movement. Generally it describes an easy crossing of 
Greek Cypriots to the North of the Island without having to perform certain acts and 
symbolic gestures which in their mind would signal the implicit recognition of the 
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. With the help of foreign actors the crossing 
becomes an easy access. 
The dilemmas and contradictions in regard to the question of in what way a 
crossing would be a form of implicit recognition of the Turkish Republic of Northern 
Cyprus can be remarkable, even with long term members of the Trainer Group. The 
following quotation is by a Greek Cypriot trainer: 
“Personally I don’t give a damn whether they sign them [immigration 
forms] or not. I would not sign because I will be accused of things I am 
not responsible for. If I sign a form and the form says on top TRNC, by 
filling it people say you are recognising the state. Maybe they are 
correct. I would not fill in any form. For me, the Republic of Cyprus starts 
in Paphos (a place in the South) and goes to Kyrenia (place in the North) 
(…) People who sign I think they are not doing the right thing, not 
because they recognise the North but because they justify the North to 
demand something for you to sign something. This is part of controlling 
you indirectly. Maybe they can later use it against you.” (44:35) 
Other Greek Cypriot trainers share this uncertainty. Every detail of the procedures at 
the Turkish Cypriot checkpoint seems to be relevant. The question of whether one’s 
own identity card has to be shown or one has to fill out a form that has to be signed 
personally determines whether a Greek Cypriot conflict resolution trainer is willing 
to pass a checkpoint or not. 
“But gradually I realised that this can not lead to any kind of official 
recognition of the regime there by me showing my ID (…) So, filling the 
form, OK (…) I would not like to put my signature on that. They don’t ask 
actually for a signature.” (32:10) 
In the context of bi-communal encounters this means that the forms for entering the 
North in the beginning were not filled in by the Greek Cypriots but by colleagues or a 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
31 
foreign actor, be it the Fulbright Commission or, less frequently, the United Nations. 
The Greek Cypriot trainers only have to pass on their personal details to the 
Fulbright Commission.24 
This means that the Greek Cyoriots are bypassing their specific problem of 
implicit recognition. The symbolic meaning of the crossing is neutralised by a foreign 
party. At the same time, it means that a crossing without this “easy access 
mechanism” is still not acceptable for Greek Cypriot members. 
With the increasing trust between the members of the Conflict Resolution 
Trainer Group the Turkish Cypriot members, for example, have taken over the tasks 
originally performed by the foreign parties. The forms of the Greek Cypriot members 
are now filled out by island Turks. This means former functions of the United Nations 
and the Fulbright Commission have been taken on by the group itself. The degree of 
independent actions has increased. 
The Turkish Cypriot administration responds to the decreasing self-restriction 
by the island Greeks and attempts to provoke another boycott by the Greek Cypriots 
by tightening the formalities for entering. When the self-restricting effect of the 
Turkish checkpoint procedures lessened, the Turkish Cypriot authorities defied 
previous assurances and again demanded the personal signature on the passing 
requests of visiting island Greeks. They deliberately made the crossing more difficult 
and blocked the easy access mechanism. The immediate response of the island 
Greeks was refusal. 
“But once, we had to visit Famagusta [ a place in the North] we were 
stopped at the checkpoint there. They said: ‘You fill in forms.’ We said: 
‘No we don’t fill in the form.’ We were there for two hours. It happened 
that the American ambassador was passing in his car, coming from the 
North to the South. He saw us, he waved at us, he stopped to talk to us. 
‘What are you doing here?’  We said: ‘We are here for 1 ½ hours.’ 
‘What?’ because he knew that we are going to the North. ‘Why?’ We said 
what they want. So he gets of his car, he got his telephone, he made 
several phones. I don’t know what happened and then, they let us go.” 
(44:13)  
                                                           
24  See Interview (44:23). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
32 
Even though this was a spontaneous intervention by the American 
ambassador, the episode illustrates a noticeable and documented American 
influence on the Turkish Cypriot checkpoint procedures.25 
On the surface “easy access” appears to be merely a formal administrative 
service but it is also the result of political influence by foreign actors on Turkish 
Cypriot checkpoint procedures. The result was that at the Turkish Cypriot 
checkpoints all that was required were some personal details rather than the 
individual wanting to cross having to fill out and sign a form personally. 
The Turkish Cypriot checkpoint procedures are deliberately aimed to provoke 
the Greek Cypriots to impose self-restriction. This proves that the Greek Cypriot 
members of the Trainer Group cannot widen their scope for action by adapting their 
behaviour. According to previous experience, even if individual Greek Cypriot 
trainers would begin to sign the immigration forms it can be expected that the 
Turkish Cypriot administration would attempt to trigger self-restriction among the 
people wanting to cross by an increased tightening of the rules. If this should not 
have the desired effect, they can always resort to exclusion. 
 
 
5.2.3 Checkpoint Interventions 
 
It is a considerable problem for the activists that, time and again, the Turkish Cypriot 
authorities at very short notice refuse passing permits to the Turkish Cypriot 
members of the Trainer Group.26 There is always grave disappointment when after a 
long journey one is not allowed to pass and the Greek Cypriot members of the group 
are waiting in vain in the buffer zone for the island Turks. Events like this undermine 
the motivation of the participants on both sides. Apart from a total ban, sometimes 
only some individual are allowed into the buffer zone and the group remains 
incomplete. Such events are often explained with “administrative difficulties with 
                                                           
25 The transcript further indicates the closeness between the bi-communal activists and the US Embassy because 
the Ambassordor recognises them. 
26  See Interview (19:76). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
33 
the application forms”. Conditions like this prevent a systematic function of the bi-
communal groups and frustrate their members.27 
“We saw the former Foreign Minister, he told us: ‘Why do you always 
apply through the Americans?’ But I told him: ‘We applied many times 
on our own we did not get permissions.’ We tried everything that was 
possible. And we don’t get permissions unless there is a strong third 
party that will push for us permissions.” (7:104)  
It needs to be mentioned that this very minister whose department refused 
numerous pass requests maintains that the applications for passing permits would 
be a mere formality. 
 
 
 
5.3 Obstacles in the Context of Institutionalisations 
 
Bi-communal institutionalisation describes the formation of an organisation that is 
determined by bi-communal membership and leadership. Bi-communal 
institutionalisation is found in two variations, namely, as an extension of an existing 
mono-communal Cypriot institution to a bi-communal one by including people of the 
other community, or as a bi-communal new formation of a governmental and/or 
private Greek-Turkish Cypriot institution. It can occur in either one of the two Cypriot 
states or abroad. 
Without encounters and when people don’t know each other, neither the 
desire for nor the vision of a form of bi-communal institutionalisation can arise. The 
discussion of a bi-communal institutions already constitutes a result of previous bi-
communal processes during which people of both communities had the opportunity 
to meet and to develop a common aim.28  
The wish for bi-communal institutionalisation can be understood as an 
indicator of an existing or growing relationship between individuals within the bi-
communal process. In the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group the wish for bi-
communal institutionalisation developed at the end of the continuous training 
                                                           
27  See Interview (2:29). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
34 
phase. Of fifteen planned projects, four were to be bi-communal institutions. These 
were a bi-communal Women’s Centre, a bi-communal Centre for Historical, Social 
and Cultural Issues of both island communities, a Language Centre for Greeks and 
Turks as well as a Training Centre for Conflict Resolution and Problem Solving. 
The advantages of a bi-communal NGO or institution compared with an 
informal group are manifold. For one thing, any form of institutionalisation serves as 
a further cementation of bi-communalism because it is tied to a financial plan. An 
established access to resources like rooms and staff results in continuity and safer 
planning as well as in a more professional approach by the members. Apart from 
this, a formal institution is a legal body that can officially receive donations and 
other forms of private or institutional support. It is therefore not surprising that the 
Trainer Group is planning to form new and bi-communal organisations. However, 
during the time of the analysis there was no case of bi-communal 
institutionalisation. 
As in the context of encounters, self-restriction and oppression are two 
important factors that result in non-action by local activists. The Greek-Cypriot 
members of the Trainer Group, for example, reject the opportunity to join a Turkish-
Cypriot organisation because they formally operate within the legal system of a state 
they do not acknowledge and that they do not want to recognize implicitly either. In 
principle, the same applies for the Turkish Cypriots. At the same time all members 
know that such a step would provoke a political reaction, even if some of them 
should be prepared to take it. For that reason, the Trainer Group has initiated a 
series of trials that I would like to call Pseudo-Institutionalisation. In other words, 
formally there won’t be any bi-communal institutions but the need for them is to be 
satisfied materially. Two functions of an institutionalisation are of particular 
importance, the creation of a bi-communal legal body and of a financial structure. 
Five such strategies will be described and discussed. So far, all attempts at a 
Pseudo-Institutionalisation have failed. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                            
28  See Interview (37:41). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
35 
Continuous financing of projects by the EU 
 
For years now the EU has had a budget for bi-communal projects, but those funds 
have to be managed by the official Planning Bureau in the South. The management 
of EU-funds is an expression of the claim of sole representation by the Greek 
Cypriots. On the Turkish side, the acceptance of these funds would be interpreted as 
an acknowledgement of this claim and therefor does not happen. As a result, five 
million ECU that were granted have not been claimed so far. 
The Greek Cypriot government, well aware of the Turkish boycott, has not 
even attempted to create a financial organisation that would enable the Turkish 
Cypriot institutions and social groups to participate in the international funds 
equally meant for them. This view is shared by some Greek Cypriot trainers. In spite 
of this, the criticism of their own government is only mild. 
 
 
Parallel Institutionalisation and Informal Financing by the EU 
 
Another way of avoiding the problem of institutionalisation is the strategy of parallel 
institutionalisation. This means that on each side a mono-communal NGO is formed 
which on an informal basis sees itself as a bi-communal unit. In that sense parallel 
institutionalisation is an attempt to avoid the problems described above of the 
impossibility of bi-communal membership and the refusal of granted international 
funds by the island Turks. A solution would be found if the Greek Cypriot NGO 
applied for international funds and received them and then informally transferred 
the money to the Turkish Cypriot partner.29 
So far, this model of financing could not be implemented for various reasons, 
mainly the legal and administrative requests of the donating organisations. The 
concept of an informal co-operation of two parallel organisations only meets with 
scepticism or refusal among the donating organisations because the money would 
be transferred to a Turkish Cypriot (partner) organisation with whom they have no 
contractual agreements at all. Apart from this, funds granted, as by the EU, for bi-
communal projects, would de facto be paid to a mono-communal (Greek Cypriot) 
                                                           
29  See Interview (16:30). 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
36 
organisation. Under those circumstances, a legally and administratively correct 
procedure is impossible. 
Such a process would also mean the clear bypassing of the authority of the 
Republic of Cyprus and the donors would be made publicly accountable within the 
Greek Cypriot community. Apart from this, it can be assumed that the authorities in 
the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus would insist on a correct transfer of the 
money to its citizens. In fact, the the Turkish Cypriot Government let the Trainers 
know that a mono-communal institutionalisation is not appreciated. 
With this model, the potential recipients within the Turkish Cypriot society in 
the North could be defamed as bribed lackeys of the EU or the Greek Cypriot 
government. Furthermore, there are group-internal reasons why the model of 
parallel institutionalisation turned out a non-viable strategy for the Conflict 
Resolution Trainer Group. According to one of the Fulbright Scholars the informal 
relationship and its uncertainties (e.g. of the finance and the realisation of the 
project on both sides) between the two mono-communal organisations proves too 
much for the existing basis of trust between the members of the Trainer Group. 
 
 
Institutionalisation in the Buffer Zone 
 
The idea of an institutionalisation in the buffer zone is based on the assumption that 
leaving the legal system of both Cypriot states behind would mean an 
institutionalisation on “neutral ground”. Practically all of the institutions planned by 
the Trainer Group were to happen in the buffer zone. 
In reality, the buffer zone does not offer a sufficiently developed structure for 
the establishment of institutions and its legal situation is not clear enough to allow 
new formations taking place. According to the Greek Cypriot government, the buffer 
zone is part of the Republic of Cyprus. The government insists on a positive 
confirmation of this legal status. Every deviation from this condition represents a 
violation of the Greek Cypriot self image as a state and is rejected. 
 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
37 
Institutionalisation on “Islands of Federalism” 
 
Since the middle of 1997 the concept of “islands of federalism” has been discussed 
by the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group and was advocated as a concept for a 
project.37 The idea is one example of the activities of the “think tank” and the 
lobbying activities of the Trainer Group. It is based on the fundamental concept of an 
institutionalisation in the buffer zone and attempts to create a legal base for bi-
communal institutions that avoids the question of recognition by establishing 
federal zones in the buffer zone. These federal zones are established according to a 
new legal form of the state. As both governments since the negotiations of 1979 
have agreed on a bi-communal concept of a Federal Republic of Cyprus, these 
islands would be a first step towards the new state in the making. The 
implementation of such a concept is beyond the competencies of actions and 
negotiations of a civic group such as the Conflict Resolution Trainer Group. For that 
reason the strategy for implementation means a careful lobbying for a concept that 
can only be realised within the parameters of a whole package of trust-building 
measurements. 
 
 
Institutionalisation Abroad 
 
One possibility would be the establishment of a bi-communal organisation 
somewhere in Europe as the question of recognition would not be an issue. This 
possibility has been discussed by the Trainer Group but so far there has been no 
such a formation. The disadvantages are the high costs in terms of money and time 
which would exceed the resources of the group members. 
So far, none of the foreign actors working on Cyprus have provided the Trainer 
Group or other bi-communal activities with an institutionalised establishment for 
various reasons. For one thing, supranational and international organisations are 
severely limited in their actions by the question of recognition. On the other hand, it 
is not in either governments’ interest to accept a financial arrangement for bi-
communal societal groups which is “neutral” and does not address the question of 
recognition. They rather aim at forms of interaction that would confirm their 
respective state explicitly or implicitly. It can be assumed that this is the reason why 
no state actor, neither the USA nor Great Britain, directly supports the Trainer Group 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
38 
and other bi-communal groups to realise some form of institutionalisation that does 
not recognise the South or the North. 
The financial support of the Trainer Group and its follow-up groups by an 
international NGO might be a possibility. Other than with the EU, the funds would 
not have to be distributed by the Planning Bureau and that would make them 
acceptable to the Island Turks, also. This model has been implemented in the 
summer 2000 for the Peace-Linc project. In this project, members of the Trainers 
Group train peace activists from Israel and Palestine. In addition, a four-party 
exchange of experiences is planned. In co-operation with a Dutch NGO the project 
money is acquired from the EU paying trainers in the North and South. 
This, however, has not happened so far as it can be anticipated that the two 
Cypriot governments would not accept such a bypass without any resistance. None 
of the foreign actors involved in bi-communal activities seems willing to face such a 
confrontation and to face the political costs of an effective bypass of the question of 
recognition. 
The reason for the lack of international financial support for bi-communal 
groups between 1994-2000 is not only the low political will of possible foreign 
supporters. It is very doubtful whether foreign state support  of an internal bi-
communal actor would not lead to his or her moral undermining in the public’s eye. 
An international NGO would clearly have greater scope for activities. For reasons of 
credibility, it would have to be more than just an agent for the transfer of 
international funds to local bi-communal groups. 
There is a lot to indicate that an avoidance of the question of recognition 
would only be possible if both Cypriot governments could be pushed to accept such 
a bypass. Such a bypass construct, whether it is suggested by foreign or internal 
actors, would come under political pressure if the governments are not prepared to 
accept them silently and do without a direct symbolic confirmation of their state. 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
39 
6 The Development Since 1997 
 
 
 
After the EU summit in Luxembourg the Turkish Cypriot leadership, as often before, 
blocked the issue of permits at the Ledra Palace Checkpoint. Only in the following 
months did it become sufficiently clear that the Turkish Cypriot government was 
determined to cut off all bi-communal contacts in the long run. The established 
mechanisms of the US networks failed to guarantee the freedom of movement of 
Turkish Cypriots. The question of how determined the attempts of the US network 
were to convince the Turkish Cypriot authorities to re-open the Ledra Palace 
checkpoint cannot be answered. 
At the end of 1997, shortly before the total ban of all bi-communal activities, 
there were about twenty-five bi-communal groups. At the end of 1997 the bi-
communal movement undermined the positions of the Turkish Cypriot government 
in their extent, form and contents more than would have been the case for the Greek 
Cypriot government. For this reason, on the Turkish Cypriot side the bi-communal 
process was considered biased and in its continuous growth presented an 
increasing political threat. 
From the beginning, the bi-communal activities of the Trainer Group 
represented a potential risk and an advantage for the Greek as well as the Turkish 
Cypriot government, in other words, the grass-root activities on the track-two-level 
could be a complement as well as a hindrance to the track-one-level. 
The Greek Cypriot government generally perceived the danger that the 
existing structure of isolation and embargoes of the South towards the North could 
be undermined by the citizens. That created the risk that the bi-communal civic 
contacts could mean an implicit recognition of the state in the North. Apart from this, 
other issues of negotiation such as the aforementioned resettlement of all 
immigrant mainland Turks could have been transcended by the civic groups. In the 
course of events those concerns proved unfounded as the Greek Cypriot trainers on 
the whole confirmed the positions of their respective governments. Many of the 
interviews show that individual Greek trainers also developed a critical attitude 
towards the effects of the embargo in the North, partly influenced by their dialogue 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
40 
with their Turkish Cypriot counterparts. The conformity of the Greek Cypriot activists 
to their government has strengthened the position of the Cyprus government on an 
international level, too. 
To the same extent as the Greek Cypriots feared an implicit recognition of the 
North the Turkish Cypriot government hoped for it. Equally one hoped on the level of 
bi-communal groups of businesspeople (a group founded by the Greek Cypriot 
businessman C. Lordos and the Turkish Cypriot businessman V. Celik which was 
unconnected to the groups around the Trainer Group) for a common development of 
economic projects which would gradually undermine the embargo). These hopes 
remained unfulfilled, though. Instead important ideological concepts such as the 
hostile image cultivated in the North of the Greek Cypriots were challenged: 
“You see the establishment in the North – sometimes I think they don’t 
know how to go about some things. There is this concept ‘We can never 
live with the Greek Cypriots again’ promoted by the officials [in the 
North] And any kind of meeting, shared vision, any kind of joint activity, 
bi-communal project of course undermines this concept.” (7:19) 
The slogan which almost sounds like a natural law that they could not live together 
with Greek Cypriots is an important corner stone for the legitimatisation of their own 
ethnically homogenous state. Gross hostile images like that cannot remain in a bi-
communal process as in the end the other person always turns out to be another 
human being – in spite of all the differences. 
Through their discussion groups, the Trainer Group has initiated a learning 
process that has had an effect on the individual participants as well as on the 
collective level of their social environment. 30 They work on the assumption that the 
new perceptions and attitudes that arose from the bi-communal encounters will be 
further communicated by the participants. Their aim is to further the social change in 
the relatively small Cypriot society. However, as a facilitator of this learning process 
the Trainer Group cannot be described as an independent political actor, but there is 
some understanding that they are able to influence their respective political levels 
with their practical work. According to many of the trainers, this was to happen 
indirectly by influencing foreign actors who knew of the new perceptions on the 
                                                           
30  See Broome, 1998. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
41 
societal level. To the same extent as the members of the Trainer Group tried to brief 
foreign track-one actors of their new ideas in regard to an approach of the two 
societies, high ranking foreign actors have taken on the ideas, desires and demands 
of the grass-roots groups and carried them into the negotiation on track one level. 
More than the Greek Cypriot leadership, the Turkish Cypriot leadership was 
increasingly confronted by remarks from the diplomacy that parts of their population 
were in opposition to their positions. 
Apart from this, there was a debate at the end of 1997 regarding the 
restructuring of the Trainer Group and their rather loosely connected follow-up 
groups. The first concept was set up by the resident Fulbright Scholar and contained 
the forming of four sub-groups. These groups were: 
• A facilitation group whose members would specialise in the supervision of the 
bi-communal groups, 
• A strategic group for concepts and ideas (think-tank) whose task was mainly 
to carry new ideas onto the track one level or other societal initiatives such as 
advice for the meetings of groups of businesspeople from both sides, 
• A group for public relations maintaining contacts to the media and to influence 
a unified presentation in the media. 
• A co-ordinating council. This group was to manage the growth of the bi-
communal groups and the continuous increase of its members. Apart from this 
it was to secure the communication and flow of information between the 
groups and its members and to initiate major events. 
The plan was to form a labour-divided and growth orientated civil movement without 
any institutionalisation that could be somewhat problematic on Cyprus. In 
November 1997 the Cyprus Consortium held a training course for trainers in order to 
recruit sufficient staff for the facilitation group (New Trainers). The existing trainers 
were aware of the politicisation of their work because of the reform plans. The 
debate went on for several weeks without achieving any clear agreement. Some of 
the original members had withdrawn from the meetings because they found the 
behaviour of the Americans too “pushy”. 
It was this situation at the EU summit in Luxembourg that supplied the pretext 
for the for the Turkish Cypriot leadership to stop all bi-communal activities at the 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
42 
Ledra Palace Checkpoint by not granting any exit permits to its citizens. Since then, 
the members of the Trainer Group have not met. Due to the commitment of some of 
members and some new people new bi-communal activities have restarted. The 
three main developments are: 
• The activities have moved from Nicosia and the Ledra Palace Checkpoint to 
the village of Pyla in the buffer zone which is inhabited by Greek and Turkish 
Cypriots. 
• The US network is not or only indirectly involved in these bi-communal 
activities. 
• There are other groups of individuals involved as the recent activities are more 
focused on younger people. 
Pyla as a meeting place has only been used by the trainers since the instigation of 
the ban in 1997. As a meeting place, it is quite controversial as it is an hour-long 
drive from Nicosia usually after work which makes it not very suitable for the many 
regular meetings of the group. Apart from this, there are few suitable buildings for 
the groups to meet. As Pyla was considered a centre for smugglers it did not have a 
good reputation and the participants were closely watched by the police and the 
secret services. It is difficult to come up with an explanation as to why the access to 
the buffer zone at Pyla is tolerated but to Nicosia it is not. Very likely that the current 
meetings in Pyla are considered a less relevant political process because they nearly 
always happen at weekends only, because of the smaller numbers involved and the 
changed composition of the group of participants. 
In spite of the awkward access, some of the bi-communal groups do meet in 
Pyla, such as the group affiliated with the bi-communal magazine Hade. 
Furthermore, it is the youth groups who more frequently use the village for 
meetings. The adolescents come partly from schools where the teachers were 
involved in bi-communal activities. 31 As early as 1996 there had been a Youth 
Encounter for a peace-project aiming at training young people together in conflict 
resolution and to initiate a network of pen friends with young people from “the other 
side”. Apart from this, the Fulbright Commission finances two to three youth camps 
                                                           
31 For the latest developments in bi-communal affairs see: www.peace-cyprus.org 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
43 
per year in the USA. During these summer-camps, the young people are partly 
looked after by members of the Trainer Group and are trained in Communication and 
Conflict Resolution. When back on Cyprus they meet fairly regularly in Pyla. 
Since the beginning of 2000, the activities have increased and in March 2000 
there was a major youth festival. At the end of August the young people from three 
summer-camps got together, and in July the Youths, together with a still very active 
trainer, organised a meeting of former inhabitants of bi-communal villages. This 
meeting was of special importance because it had the attention of the international 
media and again demonstrated the willingness of a large number of people to take 
steps towards a reconciliation. 
The number of current bi-communal activities that can be associated with the 
members of the Trainer Group is clearly lower in extent and variety compared to 
1996/97. Still, they share some characteristics that give reason for optimism. They 
are clearly more independent and less dependent on foreign support. For example, 
the Greek Cypriot businessman C. Lordos who had been involved in bi-communal 
activities opened a meeting place for Greek and Turkish Cypriot citizens (spring 
2000). This is a definite improvement in the situation regarding bi-communal events. 
The organisers don’t have to rely solely on the rooms of the United Nations at the 
Ledra Palace Hotel or at the Fulbright Commission, and they do not have to resort to 
meeting in public restaurants. As the Turkish Cypriot authorities have so far not 
closed off the access to Pyla no administrative or political interventions are 
necessary to guarantee the freedom of movement of Turkish Cypriots in the buffer 
zone. The author is of the opinion that under these conditions more and more varied 
bi-communal activities will be developed. If that should prove true a lot will be 
dependent on the reaction of the Turkish Cypriot leadership. From the point of view 
of the Turkish Cypriot government the potential risks we discussed earlier are still 
valid. Even when the danger of a politicisation of bi-communal activities by foreign 
actors is not so likely due to the new developments, it is possible that the Turkish 
Cypriot government will again resort to repressive measures and perhaps close off 
the free access to Pyla. Should that be the case the bi-communal activities will again 
be dependent on the political support of powerful foreign actors. 
How can the overall achievements of the bi-communal activities been 
described? It can be argued that the public, particularly in the South became used to 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
44 
the idea and concept of rapprochement. A hysteric-nationalistic outcry by the media, 
like the one just after the return of the Oxford group appears unlikely, if not 
impossible in today’s Cyprus. This shift in attitude can be certainly related to work of 
the Trainer Group. Moreover, projects the Trainers Group tried to implement, like a 
weekly newspaper article in the press of the other community, are being realised 
today by newspapers on both sides. Another mayor development that can be 
connected to the bi-communal groups is the foundation of the “Bureau of Bi-
Communal Reconciliation and Strengthening of Civil Society” by the Democratic 
Rally Party (DISY). It was Katie Clerides a DISY Member of Parliament, daughter of 
President Clerides and member of the Oxford group who pushed for the foundation 
of the Bureau. For the first time in its history this ruling conservative party reaches 
out for the Turkish Cypriot community, creating an institution and securing funding. 
The author considers this as a new quality in the conservative spectrum of Cypriot 
political life. Without the proof that there is a demand for reconciliation an 
institution like this never would have been created. Maybe the “visualisation” of this 
demand can be described as the greatest achievement of the bi-communal groups.  
Particularly in the South, where public opinion was very hostile to any contact with 
the North this is an achievement that is conducive to a settlement.  
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
45 
7 Lessons learned 
 
 
 
In regard to the spectrum of obstacles (self-restriction and repression) actors who 
support the continuation of the bi-communal activities of the Trainer Group were 
and are necessary because they can supply the measures required. 
On Cyprus for a long time this task has been carried out by the US Alliance of 
American actors. The shared American background has worked to the advantage of 
this alliance. At the same time it has caused suspicions in the Cypriot population 
towards this actor and the trainers associated with them. Apart from this, the work 
of the bi-communal civic groups has been politicised by this actor. While on the one 
hand this is a model for change and as such means pressure on the official 
negotiating parties, on the other hand it contains the risk of a manipulation of 
grassroots activities for reasons that are not perceivable by all participants. The 
question is how effective alliances of support can be formed without raising the 
suspicion of political bias. 
The Trainer Group and its foreign supporters have not managed to 
institutionalise the bi-communal process or to give it a viable financial basis. This 
has many causes to be found among the members of the Trainer Group, with the 
respective governments and with the lack of political risk-taking by the participating 
foreign actors. In the light of the fact that the sums spent on Conflict Resolution on 
Cyprus amount to many millions of Dollars, it is very regrettable that no permanent 
Cypriot structure could be created. Empowerment in terms of skill building should 
be followed by structural empowerment. 
The development of the Trainer Group has shown that internal actors are able 
to establish themselves in the same way as effective, neutral facilitators and can 
take on a number of Third Party functions. Within the framework of this study, some 
differences between internal and foreign facilitators became obvious: 
On the civic level, the Trainer Group seems to achieve to initiate a “deep 
dialogue” but its status and political influence is not sufficient to establish itself as a 
facilitator on the track-one-and-a half level. Foreign actors are able to do just this. At 
the same time the “1 1/2” individuals mistrust particularly the US-American 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
46 
trainer/facilitators, and for that reason a deep dialogue is hardly possible. The 
author is convinced that the lack of trust is unconnected to the trainer’s personality 
or the method applied, but rather with the worry of the participants that their 
expressions via the US network and the American negotiators become part of the 
official process of negotiation. This study has shown that this concern, at least on 
Cyprus, was not unfounded. The author is sceptical that the track-one-and-a-half 
measures facilitated by the Americans, especially in phases of official negotiations, 
can generate the same spectrum of varied and imaginative opinions as is possible in 
conflict resolution workshops. 
The bi-communal peace-building activities posed and pose chances and risks 
to the two governments on Cyprus even if no political statements on behalf of the 
activists are made. The activities can transcend the political positions of the 
negotiating partners which is a main aspect of their political importance. 
 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
47 
Bibliography  
 
 
 
Bicommunal Conflict Resolution Steering Committee Cyprus  (ed.), April 1995: 
Profile . Nicosia. 
Broome, Benjamin J., 1996: Designing the Future of Peace-Building Efforts in 
Cyprus- Report of Design Workshop held during Fall 1994 and Spring of 1995 
with Conflict Resolution Trainers and Project Leaders. Available from the 
Cyprus Fulbright Commission, Nicosia.  
-----------------1997: Designing a Collective Approach to Peace: Interactive Design and 
Problem-Solving Workshop with Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot 
Communities in Cyprus, in: International Negotiation  vol. 2, no. 3, 1997,  
pp. 381 - 407. 
-----------------1998: Overview of Conflict Resolution Activities in Cyprus: Their 
Contribution To The Peace Process, in: The Cyprus Review vol. 10, no. 1. Spring 
1998, pp. 47 - 66.  
Crawshaw, Nancy, 1978: The Cyprus Revolt: An Account of the Struggle for Union 
with Greece. London: Allen & Unwin. 
Doob, L.W., 1974: A Cyprus workshop: an exercise in intervention methodology, in: 
Journal of Social Psychology vol. 94 (1974), pp. 161 - 178.  
-----------------1976: A Cyprus workshop: intervention methodology during a 
continuing crisic, in: Journal of Social Psychology vol 98 (1976), pp. 143 - 44. 
Fisher, Ronald J., 1994: Education And Peacebuilding in Cyprus: A Report On Two 
Conflict Analysis Workshops. Saskatoon/ Canada: University of Saskatchewan 
(Dep. of Psychology).  
Hadjipavlou-Trigeorgis, Maria, 1993: Unofficial Intercommunal Contacts and their 
Contribution to Peacebuilding in Conflict Societies: The Case of Cyprus, in: The 
Cyprus Review vol. 5, no. 2, 1993, pp. 68 - 87. 
Institute For Multi-Track Diplomacy  (ed.), 1995: Initiative Report: Cyprus. 2 
March 1995, Washington, D.C.: IMTD. 
Markides, Kyriacos C., 1977: The Rise and Fall of the Cyprus Republic. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 
Berghof Report Nr. 8  
48 
Rothman, Jay, 1999: Articulating Goals and Monitoring Progress in a Cyprus Conflict 
Resolution Training Workshop, in: Ross, Marc / Jay Rothman: Theory and 
Practice in Ethnic Conflict Management: Theorizing Success and Failure. 
London: Macmillan Press, pp. 176 – 194 
Salem, Norma, 1992: The Constitution of 1960 and its Failure, in: Salem, Norma: 
Cyprus: A Regional Conflict and its Resolution. New York: St. Martin´s Press. 
Theophanous, Andreas, 1996: The Political Economy Of A Federal Cyprus, 
Intercollege Press, Nocosia, p. xiii. 
UNDP, United Nations Development Programme  (ed.), July 1984: Nicosia Master 
Plan: Final Report Executive Summary. Nicosia: UNDP, UNCHS [Habitat]. 
UNHCR, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (ed.), 1995: The Nicosia 
Sewage Project: A Plan For Nicosia A Strategy For The World, UNHCR, Nicosia,  
----------------- A Vision for the Future of Nicosia: A Partnership towards the 
Rehabilitation of Chrysaliniotissa and Arab Ahmet, UNHCR, Nicosia. 
Wolleh, Oliver, 1998: Gesellschaftliche Vertrauensbildung: Über die schwierige An-
erkennung in Zypern, in: Gewaltfreie Aktion , Heft 115/116, 30. Jahrg., 1. + 2. 
Quartal 1998. 
-----------------2000: Möglichkeiten und Grenzen interner Akteure bei der Friedens-
bildung in geteilten Gesellschaften - Die Conflict Resolution Trainer Group in 
Zypern (1993 -1997). PhD Thesis (submitted 2000), Berlin: Free University 
Berlin (to be published). 
-----------------June 2001: A Civil Society Caught up in the Question of Recognition, in: 
European Platform for Conflict Prevention and Transformation (ed.): Searching 
for Peace in Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, (to be published). 
 
 
Appendix: Overview of the Group Development
Groups of the First Phase of Proliferation
Educators Group
Citizens Group
Federation an EU Study Group
Peace Concert
"Letters to the other side" Group
Technology for Peace
Management Group
Women Group
Young Political Leaders Group
Lawyers Group
1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
Conflict Resolution Trainer Group
The Conflict Resolution Trainer Group as an Internal ActorBi-communale PhaseMono-communal
Phase
Groups of the
Second Phase
of Proliferation
Citizens Group II-V
Brussels Women Group
Co-Villager
Youth Encounters
for Peace
Youth Environmentalists
Hade Magazin
Artist Group
Students Group II
Environmentalists
Greek Cypriot
mono-communal
Workshops Bicommunal Steering Committee
Turkish Cypriot
mono-communal
Workshops
Design Workshop of
Trainer Group
 
 
Berghof Reports: An Overview∗ 
 
Berghof 
Report 
Title Author published 
1 Friedliche Einmischung. Strukturen, 
Prozesse und Strategien zur 
konstruktiven Bearbeitung 
ethnopolitischer Konflikte 
Norbert Ropers October 
1995 
1 Peaceful Intervention. Structures, 
Processes, and Strategies for the 
Constructive Regulation of 
Ethnopolitical Conflicts 
Norbert Ropers October 
1995 
2 Interkulturelle Mediation – eine 
schwierige Vermittlung.  
Eine empirisch-analytische Annäherung 
zur Bedeutung von kulturellen 
Unterschieden 
Frank Liebe  
(with the 
assistance of 
Nadja Gilbert) 
May 1996 
2 Intercultural Mediation: A Difficult 
Brokerage.  
An Empirical-Analytical Attempt to 
Assess the Impact of Cultural 
Differences 
Frank Liebe  
(with the 
assistance of 
Nadja Gilbert) 
May 1996 
3 Konstruktive Haltungen und 
Verhaltensweisen in institutionellen 
Konflikten. 
Erfahrungen, Begriffe, Fähigkeiten 
Eva Maringer / 
Reiner Steinweg 
June 1997 
4 Krisenprävention und zivile 
Konfliktbearbeitung durch die EU.  
Konzepte, Kapazitäten und 
Kohärenzprobleme 
Tobias Debiel / 
Martina Fischer 
August 
2000 
 
 
                                                           
∗  Publications by the Berghof Research Center can be downloaded from its homepage  www.berghof-center.org  
 
 
 
 
 
Berghof 
Report 
Title Author published 
4 Crisis Prevention and Conflict 
Management by the European Union. 
Concepts, Capacities and Problems of 
Coherence 
Tobias Debiel / 
Martina Fischer 
September 
2000 
5 Friedensförderung in Bosnien-
Hercegovina. Ansätze der Jugend-, 
Bildungs- und Kulturarbeit 
Martina Fischer / 
Julie Tumler 
September 
2000 
 
6 Die soziale Eingliederung von 
Kindersoldaten. Konzepte und 
Erfahrungen aus Mosambik 
Peter Steudtner March 
2001 
7 Macht und Differenz. Ein erweitertes 
Modell der Konfliktpotentiale in inter-
kulturellen Auseinandersetzungen 
Anja Weiß March 
2001 
8 Local Peace Constituencies in Cyprus. 
Citizens’ Rapproachment by the bi-
communal Conflict Resolution Trainer 
Group 
Oliver Wolleh March 
2001 
 
 
 
 
Occasional Papers: An Overview ∗ 
 
Occasional 
Paper 
Title Author published 
1 Ergebnisbericht: Interkulturelle 
Konfliktbearbeitung. Einführungs-
seminar in neue Konzepte der 
innergesellschaftlichen und 
internationalen Mediation und 
präventiven Diplomatie. 
30.November – 2. Dezember 1994 
Norbert 
Ropers 
July 1996 
out of print 
2 Golitsino Workshop for Peace 
Builders. 
25. – 29. September 1995 
Anja Weiss / 
Aleksej 
Nazarenko 
August 1996 
3 Warsaw Workshop for Peace 
Builders. 
28. Januar – 2.Februar 1996 
Anja Weiss / 
Aleksej 
Nazarenko 
September 
1996 
4 The Hungarian Concept of 
Autonomy for Romania. 
The 1993 DAHR Draft-law on 
National Minorities and 
Autonomous Communities and 
Reactions from Other Political 
Parties in Romania 
Kinga Páll September 
1996 
5 The International Relations of the 
DAHR 1989 — 96. The Democratic 
Alliance of Hungarians in Romania. 
An Introduction 
Anna-Mária 
Bíró 
August 1996 
 
6 The Protection of National 
Minorities and Regional Stability 
Kinga Gál  September 
1996 
7 Strategies and Needs of NGOs 
Dealing with Ethnopolitical 
Conflicts in the New Eastern 
Democracies 
Anja Weiss / 
Aleksej 
Nazarenko 
March 1997 
 
                                                           
∗ Publications by the Berghof Research Center can be downloaded from its homepage  www.berghof-center.org  
 
 
Occasional 
Paper 
Title Author published 
8 Eigeninitiativen einheimischer 
FriedensstifterInnen. Wirkungs-
möglichkeiten in den neuen 
östlichen Demokratien 
Sonja Borski / 
Holger Hess 
September 
1998 
9 Ethnopolitical Legitimacy and 
Ethnic Conflict Management. The 
Case of the Russian Federation in 
the Early 199os 
Airat Aklaev June 1996  
 
10 Peace Work by Civil Actors in Post-
Communist Societies 
Diana Francis / 
Norbert 
Ropers 
September 
1997 
11 Advanced Networking: A 
Conceptual Approach to NGO-
based Early Response Strategies in 
Conflict Prevention 
Anton Ivanow October 1997 
 
12 Peacebuilding Aktivitäten der 
bikommunalen Conflict Resolution 
Trainer Group in Zypern 
Oliver Wolleh November 
1997 
13 Natural Law, Agents and Patients, 
and Minority Rights 
Gabriel 
Andreescu 
November 
1999 
14 Roles and Functions of Third 
Parties in the Constructive 
Management of Ethnopolitical 
Conflicts 
Norbert 
Ropers 
November 
1997 
 
15 The Intercultural Mediation 
Project: The Bléré Experience: A 
Study of Conflict Management in 
an Intercultural Context 
Jon Sebastian November 
1997 
 
16 Zivile Konfliktbearbeitung deut-
scher NROs und Einrichtungen − 
Ein Wegweiser, 1998/99 
Cordula 
Reimann 
September 
1998 
 
 
 
Occasional 
Paper 
Title Author published 
17 Southeast European NGOs for the 
Stability Pact. 
Martina 
Fischer / 
Giovanni 
Scotto 
September 
2000 
 
 
 