Book Review: Resolving Cyprus: New Approaches to
Conflict Resolution
blogs.lse.ac.uk /lsereviewofbooks/2015/07/06/book-review-resolving-cyprus-new-approaches-to-conflictresolution/
06/07/2015

This edited volume presents a range of perspectives on the Cyprus conflict, with thirty leading experts
drawing on their research and experience to assess whether a solution can finally be found to the dispute. Nikos
Christofis finds the book to be a welcome addition to the literature on the Cyprus Problem which brings together
some of the most important arguments pertaining to the issue in a single volume.
James Ker-Lindsay (ed.), Resolving Cyprus: New Approaches
to Conflict Resolution. I.B. Tauris. London and New York, 2015.
Starting in the 1960s, when the conflict between the two
communities in Cyprus erupted and escalated, numerous UN-led
attempts at mediation were carried out with the aim of defusing the
situation and finding a solution. In 1974 the Cyprus Problem took on
an entirely new dimension with the Turkish invasion as each side
emphasised the losses they suffered and tried to legitimise their
claims. In the early 2000s there was increased optimism that a
solution would be found largely because of the EU accession talks
held in 2004. Those talks led to the UN-sponsored Annan Plan
which presented an opportunity for the two communities to construct
a viable basis for resolving the issue.
The Greek Cypriot community rejected the plan after it had been put
to a referendum, and this, together with other issues concerning
Turkey’s accession talks, led to a relative stalemate in the
negotiations between the two communities. This state of affairs
complicated matters even more for the Mediterranean island and it
seemed unlikely that a solution would be found. In recent years,
however, negotiations were revived. In this context, Resolving
Cyprus: New Approaches to Conflict Resolution, which was edited
by James Ker-Lindsay, is an impressive and timely contribution to
the existing literature.

James Ker-Lindsay, as a leading authority on the Cyprus Problem who has followed developments in the country for
decades and seen the failures of the attempts made so far to solve the issue, initiated this project with a focus on
core questions such as whether the Cyprus Problem can actually be solved, what has made the Cyprus Problem so
difficult to resolve, and whether the main issue at hand is the end goals that are being pursued (p. 2).

1/3

Image credit: UN Buffer Zone – Green Line, Cyprus byJpatokal (Wikimedia CC BY-SA)
Thirty leading experts on the issue were asked to discuss their thoughts within the scope of their research interests
and identify the factors or particular aspects of the Cyprus Problem that need to be comprehensively addressed so
that concrete results can be achieved. They were also asked to identify those parties which have blocked efforts to
find a solution. The essays do not hold to a strict academic format burdened with extensive references, but rather
they take the form of essays that cover almost all aspects of the Cyprus Problem, including personal experiences.
This is one of the reasons the book does not adhere to a particular thematic structure, and this is a reflection of a
deliberate choice made by the editor to allow for a multitude of perspectives as well as overlap between the
chapters in the book.
Some of the essays treat the Cyprus Problem through a historical lens (Ahmet An, Jan Asmussen, Husam
Mohamad, Robert Holland), while others, such as the entries by Klearchos A. Kyriakides and Nikos Skoutaris,
approach the issue through the perspective of law. Robert McDonald weighs into the discussion from the standpoint
of security, Giorgos Charalambous and George Kyris focus on party politics, and numerous other essays emphasise
the settlement process in terms of both external and internal factors.
The chapters by Birte Vogel and Oliver Richmond, Erol Kaymak, James Ker-Lindsay, Paschalis Kitromilides, Ahmet
Sözen, and Mustafa Ergün Olgun focus on the issue of a bizonal, bicommunal federation (BBF). The recent
discovery of gas reserves has sparked new interest in the issue, as demonstrated by the essays by Hubert
Faustmann and Ayla Gürel and Harris Tzimitras, and these authors point out that the gas reserves have been
perceived as a potential catalyst for peace. Another essay deals with civil society (Yeshim Harris), and Maria
Hadjipavlou takes up the issue in terms of gender, one of the least analyzed aspects of the Cyprus Problem.
Although the contributions employ different approaches, they all stress the importance of finding a solution and the
benefits that would be brought to the people of the island through accession to the EU as a whole. In addition, the
chapters point out that the entire region would benefit from stability on Cyprus. However, there is a considerable
amount of skepticism and pessimism among many of the contributors and some of the essays state outright that
there is still much work to be done and that it remains debatable whether or not a commonly accepted agreement
can be reached, as it constitutes “another minefield [concerning] what is a just solution” (p. 117).
There were some typographical errors as regards names (p. 185, p. 199, p. 244, p. 275) and in some cases the
same name was written differently (i.e. Clement Dodd on p. 192 and C. H. Dodd on p. 218). In the book the main
issue at hand was referred to in numerous ways (in some cases even within the same essay); in some places it was
called the Cyprus Problem, in others the Cyprus Dispute, and still others the Cyprus Question, and this could prove
frustrating for readers unfamiliar with the developments that have occurred in Cyprus over the years.

2/3

Nonetheless, Resolving Cyprus is an impressive compilation of essays and its publication could not be more timely
as it coincides with the landslide victory of Mustafa Akinci as the new Turkish Cypriot leader. His Cypro-centric, antistatus quo, and pro-solution agenda has brought about a climate of euphoria in both communities and created a
positive atmosphere for the new round of negotiation talks that started in May of 2015.
This book is a welcome addition to the literature on the Cyprus Problem mainly because it brings together some of
the most important arguments pertaining to the issue, and it brings together an array of essays that touch on almost
every aspect of the developments that have occurred on the island. As such it will be an indispensable volume for
those interested in the Cyprus Problem. All parties that are directly involved in the settlement process would greatly
benefit from consulting the book as it takes up all the stereotypes that have impacted the settlement process and the
issues that have thus far blocked efforts to find a solution to the Cyprus Problem.

Nikos Christofis received his PhD from Leiden Institute for Area Studies (LIAS), Leiden University in 2015. His
dissertation has the title From Socialism via Anti-Imperialism to Nationalism. EDA – TİP: Socialist Contest over
Cyprus. He edited, revised and annotated a Turkish grammar (in Greek), and published articles in books and
journals. He is also one of the reviewers and members of the editorial board of the e-journal Athens Journal of
History and the Politikon: IAPSS Political Science Journal, as the chief-editor of Ottoman and Turkish Studies,
Dissertation Reviews.
Copyright 2013 LSE Review of Books

3/3

