CHAPTER TWELVE
CIVIL SOCIETY ACTIVE DIALOGUE
NETWORKS IN CYPRUS:
PEACE-ING IT TOGETHER AT THE GRASSROOTS
BÜLENT KANOL AND øLKE DAöLI

MANAGEMENT CENTRE OF THE MEDITERRANEAN, CYPRUS;
UNIVERSITY OF WARWICK, U.K.

Introduction
The Cyprus problem has long attracted the attention of scholars,
researchers, politicians and international organizations. Nevertheless, even
the most static, protracted and normalized conflicts are not immune to the
dynamic nature of society, identity and Realpolitik. Despite many
obstacles, including external factors and the large number of players,
finding a comprehensive solution to the Cyprus conflict is imperative. In
addition, an understanding of the Cyprus problem can help advance the
peace-building and reconciliation literature for at least five main reasons:
(1) The prolongation of the conflict involves multiple human rights
violations for the people of Cyprus. The accession of the Republic of
Cyprus (RoC) to the European Union (EU) without the inclusion of the
Turkish Cypriots and prior to a comprehensive settlement has placed
the conflict within the borders of the EU. It also presents a significant
challenge for EU governance across a diverse range of issues, and
especially for the EU’s objective of achieving stability in the eastern
Mediterranean (Christou, 2012);
(2) The conflict has significant ramifications for the relationship between
NATO and the EU. Competing claims over the offshore gas resources
in Cyprus, and the fact that Turkey’s geographical location as an

264

Chapter Twelve
important corridor for gas and oil transmission to the EU have
implications for EU energy policy;1
(3) Although one can be sceptical about the Turkish governing party
AKP’s (Adalet ve Kalknma Partisi - Justice and Development Party)
intentions with regards to full EU membership, the non-resolution of
the Cyprus conflict presents an obstacle for Turkey’s EU accession;
(4) The peace negotiations that were re-launched in 2008 effectively
stalled when the RoC assumed the EU presidency in 2012. The peace
talks were re-initiated briefly in early 2014; however they were once
more postponed indefinitely when the President of the RoC withdrew
from UN sponsored negotiations between the Greek and Turkish
Cypriot leaderships, claiming a violation of Cyprus’ Exclusive
Economic Zone by the Turkish seismic vessel Barbaros (A.
Anastasiou, 2015);
(5) The ongoing financial crises and economic concerns of the
communities have gradually pushed the Cyprus problem down the list
of priorities (Eurobarometer, 2013, 2014). Unemployment, inflation
and increasing crime rates are now seen as more important.
Consequently, frustrations over more immediate challenges within the
communities are shifting attention away from the Cyprus problem, and
reconfiguring the political dynamics on the island, leading to even
deeper uncertainty.

Numerous diplomatic efforts have been made to produce peaceful
reunification (H. Anastasiou, 2008). Over the decades, myriad negotiations
and peace-talks have begun and have stalled, and were then perhaps fasttracked and revisited. There is a substantial literature on the Cyprus
problem; the material focusing on identity, ethnicity, EU accession, and
conflict resolution are very rich (See Aktar et al., 2010; H. Anastasiou,
2008; Christou, 2010; Constantinou, 2007; Diez and Tocci, 2009;
Gürkaynak, 2007; Hatay and Bryant, 2008; Michael, 2007; Turk, 2006;
Volkan, 2008; Wolleh, 2001). However, this by no means indicates that all
aspects, angles and approaches have been covered and addressed. For
example, some of the areas where the literature can be enriched and
deepened are: the socio-dynamics of the willingness of people in civil
society to co-operate and work together; the influence and impact of civil
society on Track One level diplomacy;2 the transformation of civil society

1

http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-07-219_en.htm
Multi-Track Diplomacy is a conceptual way to view the process of international
peace-making, focusing on the interconnectedness of different activities,
individuals, institutions, and communities involved in reconciliation. As it will be
discussed later on in the chapter, the multi-track diplomacy approach is based on
2

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

265

following Cyprus’ EU accession; the interaction between local and
migrant identities and their effects on reconciliation; the general impact of
immigration on perceptions of nationalism and ethnic identity; and the
effects of the recent regional dynamics (in the EU, the Middle East and
Turkey) on the Cyprus problem.
As the literature and scholarly work on the Cyprus conflict and Cypriot
identities is very rich, it is unnecessary to give an historical account of the
Cyprus problem or the development of ethnic identities here. Neither will
this chapter delve into a theoretical discussion about the nature of civil
society. Rather, the aim is to give a brief account of the key concepts used
in this chapter, namely multi-track diplomacy, civil society, and
ontological security.3 Introducing these three key concepts will establish
the framework for the underlying argument that civil society initiatives are
crucial for peace-making and peace-building in Cyprus, and will set the
scene for the empirical material presented in the third and fourth sections.
This chapter has three main objectives. Firstly, it presents a specific
and innovative methodological approach to Track Two level peacebuilding efforts.4 Secondly, it introduces and demonstrates the relevance
of the emerging literature on ontological security to Cyprus. Thirdly, it
highlights the importance of “the day after” (as Kyriacou et al., 2009 call
it). If there is no civic ownership of the settlement and convergence at the
grassroots level, then there is no firm ground on which to build a
sustainable peace, endangering the very stability and implementation of
any peace agreement.
Following this order, the first section of the chapter sets the scene by
introducing the empirical case, the concept of “multi-track diplomacy” and
provides a brief account of Cypriot civil society. The second section
introduces and reviews the emerging ontological security literature and
assesses its utility for conflict resolution and peace-building. In the third
and fourth sections, utilizing a methodology that fuses the established
theoretical framework with the empirical work, we develop a best
practices schema for peace-building efforts at the grassroots level. The
the works of Joseph Montville (1987), and Louise Diamond and John McDonald
(1996)
3
Individuals, in addition to physical security, also seek ontological security, that is,
security of the “self,” which is concerned with the identity and biographical
continuity of the perceived “self.” According to scholars such as Giddens (1991),
Mitzen (2006) and Rumelili (2010), ontological security is achieved by routinizing
relationships with significant others, and actors therefore become attached to those
relationships, which contribute to perpetuation of conflicts.
4
The various diplomacy tracks are explained in the next section.

266

Chapter Twelve

third section presents the details of the process and the methodology, while
the fourth section analyses the empirical data within the theoretical
framework. The chapter concludes by assessing what the analysis
contributes to understanding reconciliation efforts and peace-building in
Cyprus. The departure point for this is the premise that it is important to
empower civil society organizations (CSOs) and actively engage key
people and expand participation in peace and reconciliation efforts in order
to build a constituency that has the involvement and participation of
different groups from both urban and rural communities across the island.
While the theoretical foundations presented in the first sections lay the
basis for supporting this premise, the empirical case study provides a
practitioner’s perspective as to how to achieve it.

1. Civil Society and Reconciliation
1.1 Why is civil society imperative for peace-building?
Even though the concept of civil society has a long and distinguished
history in Western political theory, the idea remains ambiguous, and
“often degenerates into a muddled political slogan” (White, 1994: 376). In
general, the genesis of the idea is an idealized counter-image to the state
and the market in the realm of freedom and pluralism, “an embodiment of
social virtue confronting political vice” (White, 1994: 376). Even though
the precise meaning of “civil society” remains elusive in political theory,
this general view shows that the concept needs contextualization to
become meaningful. While Rakner (1992) limits the concept to
organizations which actually interact with the state, Bayart (1986) confines
the term to those organizations that embody a confrontational and
antagonistic relationship with the state. On the other hand, Foley and
Edwards (1996) adopt a wider definition, conceptualizing it as the whole
realm of private voluntary associations. Despite these diverse
conceptualizations, there is a convergence in the literature that civil society
has come to be seen as an essential ingredient for healthy societies (see
Cohen, 1994). Especially in liberal democracies, civil society has emerged
as a growing third sector as an intermediary between public and private
life; an arena outside the sphere of state, business and family but closely
interrelated with all of these. This is by no means a new phenomenon, but
from a practitioner’s perspective it is increasingly important for seeking to
build a more just and ethical world. Therefore, for the purposes of this
chapter we conceptualize civil society as the sum of all formal or informal
groups of people who share common interests and who mobilize for the

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

267

public benefit. In our conceptualization, the key ingredient for civil society
is public benefit or common good; whether institutionalized or not, nonstate actors with a common vision and mission working towards some
kind of social change or reform for public benefit are included in the
definition of “civil society.”
The diplomacy literature helps us locate the relevance and significance
of civil society initiatives for conflict resolution and reconciliation. Partly
building on the works of Joseph Montville (1987), Louise Diamond and
John McDonald (1996) conceptualized multi-track diplomacy systems and
identified nine tracks:
Table 1

268

Chapter Twelve

Even though this has become a popular framework in the diplomacy
and conflict resolution literature, in practice different tracks can overlap. It
may not be easy to distinguish Track Two from Tracks Three and Four, as
nongovernmental peace-building initiatives reach out to private citizens
and businesses to support their efforts. In small communities such as
Cyprus, peace activists tend to be “recycled” for different tracks
simultaneously. For example, a bi-communal peace-building project
implemented by a consortium of CSOs (Track Two) can work in
partnership with a community media centre (Track Nine) to reach out to
rural populations (Track Four) in order to engage young people in an
exchange program and train them in mediation skills (Track Five), or to
reach out to businesses and chambers of commerce to support economic
integration through joint ventures (Track Three); as a result, the project
presents a needs analysis or an evaluation report to international donors on
how to plan future peace-building funding schemes (Track Eight). This
blurring of distinctions across tracks however is not important for the
purpose of this chapter. The important distinction is that the Track One
level comprises political leaders and elites at the state level doing anything
from international and domestic decision making to local and global
peace-making; while Track Two diplomacy, which at times overlaps with
Tracks Three, Four, Five and Six, is about the work of CSOs and
nongovernmental professionals, focusing on citizen engagement and
bridging the communication gap between society and political elites and
institutions.
It is important that all tracks work together in a collaborative and
complementary way, as it would be naïve to engage with a protracted
conflict solely at the Track One level and expect thereby to garner a
sustainable space for peace (See Broome, 1998; Jarraud, 2012; Kyriacou et
al., 2009; Lordos et al., 2009; MacGinty et al., 2006 ; Montville, 1987;
Zartman, 2007). In line with Diamond and McDonald, Gürkaynak (2007)
asserts that Track Two diplomacy relies on a transformation of worldview
where basic human needs set the agenda and where collaboration,
accessibility and inclusion are central considerations. The main goal is to
bring together community members, facilitate a constructive dialogue and
support inclusive, creative and sustainable approaches to reconciliation
and peace-building. For many scholars within the diplomacy and conflict
resolution literature (See Gawerc, 2006; John and Kew, 2008; Marchetti
and Tocci, 2009; Orjuela, 2003; Paffenholz and Spurk, 2006; Turk, 2006),
Track Two is the bridge between Track One and Three, an essential
component of peace-building where the conflict itself has become
embedded and ingrained in collective identities. This literature maintains

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

269

that the connection established by Track Two (and other tracks) between
Track One and the general public helps to support peace-building and
rapprochement at the grassroots level without relying solely on the
political elite or some outside actor to produce a political settlement. In
cases such as Cyprus where official peace-making efforts constantly stall,
Track Two is the locomotive that keeps peace-building on the agenda and
fights “peace fatigue.” 5 Track Two makes the idea of peace and peace
negotiations accessible to the public, which is crucial for creating
ownership of what emerges and a strong constituency for peace.
An example of Track One diplomacy in the Cyprus case is the socalled “Annan Plan” process in early 2000s. The Annan Plan, while
negotiated on a Track One level and put to simultaneous referenda in 2004,
was accepted by the Turkish Cypriot community, but turned down on
Track Two and Three levels by the Greek Cypriot community. Whereas
there was an extensive mobilization and proactive efforts by Turkish
Cypriot civil society in the 2000s, the work being done at the Track Two
and Track Three levels in the Greek Cypriot community remained minimal
and failed to create support and a strong constituency for the peace plan.
For Michális Michael (2007), mediators who interact exclusively with the
political elite at Track One at the expense of identifying and engaging in
dialogue with opposing voices create a communicative comfort zone that
locks the public out and underestimates the force of public opinion
(Michael, 2007). Thus, as the Annan Plan was not communicated as a
beneficial option for the Greek Cypriot community and no grassroots
ownership was created of the specific idea of peace on the table, the result

5

It is not uncommon for communities to develop “peace fatigue” in normalized
protracted conflicts, or, as Adamides and Constantinou (2011: 242-58) call them,
“comfortable conflicts.” By “peace-fatigue” we mean a shift in focus to more
mundane and internal problems as people and civil society representatives start
feeling disillusioned and disempowered without a tangible achievement at Track
One level peace-building efforts. This was prevalent, especially among the Turkish
Cypriot community, following the rejection of the Annan Plan by the Greek
Cypriot community. The Turkish Cypriots felt that even though they had done
everything within their power to change the status quo, a comprehensive settlement
was not achieved. Peace fatigue can also be observed by looking at the gap
between the desire for a solution and the expectation of one; according to the
Cyprus 2015 survey of over 1000 people (conducted in 2011), while 69 percent of
Greek Cypriots and 42 percent of Turkish Cypriots stated that they desire a
solution, 61 percent and 58 percent respectively said they did not expect the peace
process to succeed (Cyprus, 2015).

270

Chapter Twelve

was an overwhelming “no” vote (75.8% percent) in the 2004 referendum.6
This is not to suggest that there were no other causes of the “no” vote, but
it does present an example of how efforts at the Track Two level are
needed to transform public opinion and garner support for peace-making at
the Track One level, as happened in Turkish Cypriot civil society.
It should be no surprise that the proposed agreement for a
comprehensive settlement after 40 years of protracted conflict failed to
find support among the Greek Cypriot community. It had been discussed
only at the Track One level, when substantial and encompassing peacebuilding efforts at the Track Two and Track Three levels were also
required. As Track Two focuses on confidence building and the
transformation of antagonistic relationships; and as saying “yes” to a
comprehensive settlement, means saying “yes” to confronting ingrained
societal fears and anxieties, and “yes” to living side by side with the
“enemy other,” the importance of Track Two level peace-building for
achieving a sustainable comprehensive settlement becomes apparent.
Reconciliation is a process of restoring relationships that have been
alienated due to conflict, and just as in interpersonal conflicts,
reconciliation on a societal level means dealing with a history of
relationships, perpetrators, victims, and beneficiaries (Bar-Tal, 2000). The
more the various tracks involve and support each other in the peacebuilding process, the more space there is for reconciliation to develop
within and across the communities. In this chapter, we maintain that it is
difficult and unsustainable to reconcile on one level without reconciling on
the others, a view which will be further supported in the second section’s
discussion of the ontological security framework.

1.2 Civil society across the divide: Setting the Scene
Even though the role of civil society has been discussed for centuries
(Marchetti and Tocci, 2009), the literature on civil society and its impact
on peace-making in Cyprus is thin. The field of conflict resolution,
especially in the last decade, has increasingly paid special attention to the
role of civil society in intractable conflicts. This trend is easily observable
in the way international donors manage and distribute their aid programs
through civil society initiatives aimed at conflict resolution and
reconciliation. In the context of Cyprus, the main objectives of civil society
6

Greek-Cypriot community: Yes: 24.2 percent, No: 75.8 percent, Turnout: 88
percent; Turkish-Cypriot Community: Yes: 64.9 percent, No: 35.1 percent,
Turnout: 87 percent (BBC, 2015).

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

271

initiatives until the 1990’s focused on offering opportunities to members
of the communities to develop face-to-face communication and conflict
resolution skills. As civil society slowly matured, the initiatives that were
focusing on enabling people to develop personal and professional
relationships across the Green Line became more specific, especially after
the crossing points between the two sides opened in 2003. Joint projects
were developed to address shared social, political, environmental and
economic concerns (Hadjipavlou, 2012). Irrespective of their “project”
objectives, the underlying common goal of these bi-communal civil
society efforts was to establish a common vision for the future, where the
“us” and “them” and “friend” and “enemy” dichotomies could be
transcended or at least mitigated, and the two main communities of the
island could come to see the problem from the perspective of the “other.”
Thus, the overall goal has been to promote rapprochement across the
divide, and to help remove the mental barriers that lead to the view that the
two communities cannot coexist side by side.
Although many reconciliation efforts and civil society initiatives have
been tried over the years, civil society movements have failed to have a
significant effect on the course and outcome of the peace negotiations.
One of the main recommendations of the CIVICUS State of Civil Society
survey (2011) was that capacity building in advocacy and lobbying,
establishing effective communication channels between CSOs and public
officials and decision-makers, and greater co-operation among CSOs
would all enhance civil society’s impact at the policy level. This could in
turn encourage more people to be actively engaged in CSOs and increase
the comprehensiveness of their work as well as their legitimacy. Given the
peace fatigue among the Cypriot communities and the demanding nature
of the work, it is extremely important to empower CSOs in order to engage
more people in their operations and to enhance their lobbying and
advocacy activities. Even though there have been some important
developments following the opening of the crossing points, such as a
significant increase in the number of bi-communal projects7 (see Mahallae,
2013), the establishment of technical committees (UN 2008), joint action
and stronger civil society partnerships between the communities (see
AHDR, 2011; CCMC, 2009; CYINDEP, 2006), there is no doubt that the
majority of the population on the island is not actively engaged in peace
and reconciliation efforts. As previously discussed, this lack of
engagement poses a big concern, given the importance of establishing a
peace constituency. The CIVICUS survey (2011: 112) found that 50
7

Rising from approximately 35 projects in 1995 to over 200 after 2004.

272

Chapter Twelve

percent of Greek Cypriots and 45 percent of Turkish Cypriots had never
visited the other part of the island, and that participation in bi-communal
activities remains limited to ten percent for the Greek Cypriot community
and 15 percent of the Turkish Cypriot community. The bulk of CSOs are
located in the capital, as are the community leaders and the technical
committees established under the official negotiations, along with the
international organizations engaged in peace-building. Consequently, the
involvement of non-state actors away from Nicosia is relatively more
difficult and so engagement in peace-building and reconciliation efforts is
largely limited to the capital, with the exception of some local initiatives in
Famagusta (see Mahallae, 2013). As a result, people outside the Nicosia
area have mostly remained detached and distanced from the reconciliation
efforts. It is absolutely imperative that more people are engaged in peace
and reconciliation efforts and a constituency for peace is built across the
island, with the involvement and participation of groups from other towns
and rural communities. In their comprehensive analysis of island-wide
peace-building activities in Cyprus, Hadjipavlou and Kanol (2008)
confirm that the majority of participants in conflict resolution workshops
and mediation training came from educated groups who could speak
English. 8 As a result, despite having inspiring outcomes and creating a
pool of highly skilled individuals equipped to contribute to the peace
process, the activities were criticized for being too academic and elitist.
MacGinty, Muldoon, and Ferguson emphasize that “there is often a
dissonance between the peace agreed at the elite level and the
interpretation and experience of that peace at the group and individual
level” (MacGinty et al., 2006). This stresses the importance of having a
broad constituency that takes ownership of the move to peace; without it,
reconciliation may fail to develop into a transformative peace which
allows the underlying causes of conflict to be addressed. The importance
of a political agreement for peace-building cannot be overstated; however,
what happens “the day after” an agreement (Kyriacou et al., 2009) is
equally important. The reason for thinking about “the day after” is to stress
the need to provide a feeling of security that the traumas of the past will
not reoccur. Whether or not a political agreement will produce an
environment of insecurity and fear by asking people to live with those they
believed were their existential enemies depends on whether reconciliation
at the grassroots level has managed to reconfigure the “self” and “other”
dynamic through practices of confidence building and reconciliation. The
next section discusses the relationship between the images of “self” and
8

English is the common language used in bi-communal initiatives in Cyprus.

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

273

“other” and what reconfiguring that relationship might mean, but a
metaphor seems apt here: The day after a peace agreement is like marriage
after the wedding day; maintaining marital harmony is a long,
transformative process where people need to believe that their identities
can continue to be different without being threatening, and that they can
coexist and develop a sense of shared purpose and a common vision.
Looking at the example of Northern Ireland, Gallagher (2004) points
out that people can maintain a level of cross-community interaction
without gaining insight into alternative views on the issues that had
divided their communities from each other. One particular consequence of
this is “that communities in Northern Ireland have a clear sense of the
wrong that has been done to them, but little understanding of the sense of
victimhood that other communities feel” (Gallagher, 2004: 638). In this
respect, Northern Ireland is comparable to Cyprus: since the opening of
the crossing points in 2003, increased border crossings and crosscommunity interaction did not necessarily translate into meaningful
understanding and reconfiguration of perceptions of the “other” community.
This is apparent from the reactions to a speech made by the Republican
Turkish Party (CTP9) Member of Parliament Do÷uú Derya in parliament
on 15 December 2014. She said that Turkish Cypriots were not the only
ones losing as a result of the Cyprus conflict, and that there was a need to
acknowledge the traumas and sufferings of others. Highlighting the
sufferings of Greek Cypriots, Armenians and Maronites, Derya said that
the Orthodox Church had allowed abortions for rape victims in 1974,
contrary to Orthodox doctrine (See Hadjipavlou 2010). This speech made
the headlines the next day, both in Cyprus and in Turkey (Yenidüzen,
2014). The majority of commentary on online platforms, social media and
in the mainstream media denied the claims Derya had made and
condemned her for being “ignorant” and a “traitor.” Despite the fact that
cross-community interaction has been increasing since the opening of the
crossing points, this is a sad example which demonstrates that there is still
little understanding of “the other” as different but unthreatening, and little
recognition of the “other’s” pain.
The argument of this section is that a signed agreement can only ever
be a small part of a wider, inclusive and deliberative process of social
reconciliation (see Jarraud, 2012; Kay, 2012). The next section develops
9

Republican Turkish Party, a left-wing, pro-peace, social democratic political
party in the northern part of Cyprus, founded in 1970. The party was led by
Mehmet Ali Talat from 1996 until his election as president in 2005.

274

Chapter Twelve

the concept of ontological security and relates it to questions of identity
and peace-building, to further demonstrate the importance of peace
ownership at the grassroots level and the role of civil society in achieving
sustainable peace.

2. Are we scared of peace? Dependency of the “self”
on the “other”
It is easy to want peace, to long for it, but equally difficult to imagine it.
Imagining peace means re-imagining the “self” and the “other” in a future
full of uncertainties. Peace is conditional: in Cyprus it depends on
alleviating the fears and anxieties of the two main communities on the
island, but these fears and anxieties are by no means static and
homogeneous. Fifty-five years after the establishment of the Republic of
Cyprus, over 50 years after communal division, and 40 years after the
physical division of the island, life in Cyprus goes on as if it were normal
to have the barbed wire of the Green Line looming in the background.
Even though the two main communities of the island now can freely travel
across the crossing points and have increased their interactions since 2003,
thousands of children of the last two generations grew up learning about
the existential enemy that lived next door, just across the Green Line. The
communities created an image for themselves that depended on the image
of the enemy; where all internal was good and just, and all external was
bad and evil (see Papadakis et al., 2006; Papadakis, 2008; Spyrou, 2006;
Volkan, 2008). Peace-building and reconciliation efforts challenge this
image, and hence they challenge our very identities. This is where
ontological security comes into play.
According to Giddens (1991: 53), self-identity is “the self as reflexively
understood by the person in terms of her or his biography” and identity
“presumes continuity across time and space.” Subsequently, he explains
ontological security as the confidence the self has in sustaining a
“biographical continuity” through establishing a system of basic trust in
the real world and in social relations with others. Ontological security is an
emotive identification, not always an overt cognitive experience (Noble,
2005); rather it is about the trust we have in the continuity of our selfidentity and in our social and material environments of action (Giddens,
1990: 92). This trust shows itself in the routines we adopt that reinforce
and reproduce our ontological security. In creating a world to establish our
self-identities, reinforced by routines and trust in our personal and material
environment, we draw borders to decide what is in and what is out, to
decide what is “us” and what is not. Giddens (1991: 42), who notes that

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

275

“learning what is not me” is the origin of self-identity, affirms the
discursive necessities that make identity dependent on difference.
Drawing largely on Giddens’ work, the concept of ontological security
has given birth to a growing body of literature in International Relations
(Browning and Joenniemi, 2012; Kinnvall, 2004; Lupovici, 2012; Mitzen,
2006; Roe, 2008; Steele, 2005, 2008; Zarakol, 2010). Even though there is
no consensus among IR scholars on whether or not states, collectives or
groups are primarily driven by ontological security seeking/producing
practices, Mitzen (2006) and Steele (2005) convincingly argue that
communities care about their ontological security at least as much as their
physical security.
Self-identity is the anchor for ontological security and the foundational
pillar of our biographic continuity. Rumelili (2004) and Mitzen (2006)
support this view of identity construction, maintaining that identity is
dependent on difference. Building on Giddens’ understanding of the link
between self-identity and routines, Rumelili (2015) stresses that identity is
constituted not through just any routine, but specifically through those that
articulate difference and distinctiveness. For Behnke (2006), identities
cannot exist without self/other distinctions, and actors constantly produce
and reproduce their identities (be they national, ethnic, religious etc.)
through discourses of security.
As long as identity has boundaries (whether flexible or rigid), there are
those that are included and those that are excluded: those that are excluded
are different to the “self” for some reason. Perhaps they represent an old
self, a worse self or an “other.” McSweeney (1999: 15) sees ontological
security as a “property of a relationship, a quality making each secure in
the other.” However, what makes the self secure in the other could be a
negative relationship of enmity and hostility as well as a positive one of
friendship and harmony (Roe 2008; Rumelili 2013). Browning and
Joenniemi (2012) emphasize that although actors need to distinguish
themselves from other actors to be able to exist, difference need not
always appear as negative. Adopting a relationist approach, this chapter
maintains that identity depends on self/other relations, where the
construction of self is based on difference and the interaction of self with
“others,” cumulatively creating a biographical narrative of the self;
however, this construction is “not destined to translate into mutually
exclusive and incompatible categories of subjectivity” (Browning and
Joenniemi, 2012: 493). This means that identity based on difference does
not have to translate into a relationship of othering and perception of the
“other” as threatening.

276

Chapter Twelve

In protracted conflicts, identities are configured and reproduced based
on an image of an existential enemy. As such, the conflict itself and the
relationship with the enemy can reinforce the sense of ontological security
because the “self” is dependent upon this relationship with the “enemy
other,” where trust in the biographical continuity of the self becomes
ingrained in the conflict-producing routines themselves. Removing the
“enemy other” from the intrinsic identity definitions of the self could leave
the self ontologically insecure. Confidence building measures (CBMs) that
consider intricate nuances of identity and the role of ontological security in
peace-building can ensure that self-identity based on difference does not
translate into a relationship of enmity or othering.
According to Sigel (1989: 459), “There exists in humans a powerful
drive to maintain the sense of one’s identity, a sense of continuity that
allays fear of changing too fast or being changed against one’s will by
outside forces.” This drive is what makes all actors ontological security
seekers. As actors feel existential anxiety, it is not uncommon for them to
wish to reaffirm their self-identity or become compulsively attached to
their routines. A critical situation that causes ontological insecurity may
arise from deep uncertainty (Mitzen, 2006), such as a sudden change in the
identity definitions that tie the self to the objective world, or failure to
have the self acknowledged and affirmed by others (B. McSweeney, 1996;
Zarakol, 2010). A peace agreement at the Track One level without
reconciliation at the other tracks is an example of a critical situation that
creates uncertainty because it essentially reconfigures the enemy as the
new compatriot, requiring a sudden change in identity definitions, where
the threatening other becomes part of the “self.”
In such a state of uncertainty and insecurity, actors are tempted to
engage in practices of othering to re-affirm the identity of the self, where
the other is seen as not only different, but also inferior and threatening
(Campbell, 1998). The self is tempted to fortify the borders of its identity,
more often than not by turning to exclusivist rhetoric to differentiate
between members and non-members of the in group in order to reassure
itself of the boundary between them. In such situations of intensified
anxiety, actors resort to xenophobic, fundamentalist and populist accounts
of nationalism and religion as an ontological security-seeking strategy
(Browning and Joenniemi, 2012; Kinnvall, 2004; Roe, 2008).
It is worth noting but not at all surprising that historical sources on
Cyprus are contradictory. Since the establishment of the short-lived
Republic in 1960 each community has had its own schools, preferred
newspapers, political parties, cultural and sport organizations, and
preferred version of history that paints the out-group as untrustworthy and

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

277

aggressive. For Broome (2005: 83) “the past has been distorted beyond
recognition by the educational systems and political propaganda of both
sides” in Cyprus. For example, while the Greek Cypriot history textbooks
focus on the British rule and the events of 1974, Turkish Cypriot history
textbooks focus on the Ottoman period and the inter-communal strife
before the events of 1974 (Makriyianni and Psaltis, 2007). History
education has been based on an “essentialist argument that relies on
principles of racial descent” (Papadakis, 2008: 134) as a determinant of
identity, which leaves very little room for the self to “choose,” “mould” or
“define” its ethnic or national identity in Cyprus. Of course the use of
historical narratives to reinforce political legitimacy is by no means unique
to Cyprus. In many societies, especially those with ethno-national conflicts,
history is often used to propagate a narrative focusing on the suffering of
one group in order to legitimate its political goals. In these narratives, the
suffering of others is ignored and their historical existence and legitimacy
is questioned (Papadakis 2008). There is no doubt that historical propaganda
employed in textbooks for the past 40 years has played a big role in
Cypriot identity formation and the (mis)perception of the other(s) as
illegitimate and antagonistic. Thus, peace negotiations that rely on the
reunification of Cyprus based on a bi-communal, bi-zonal federation with
political equality, single sovereignty and a single citizenship (UNSC,
2008) automatically challenge the self-narratives and consequently the
ontological security of both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.
Following LeBaron (2003), Broome et al. (2012) contend that cultural
differences affect conflict communication, and that conflicts are not just
about territory, boundary, and sovereignty issues but they are also about
acknowledgment, representation, and legitimization of different identities,
as well as ways of living, being, and making meaning. Zarakol (2010) and
Rumelili (2010) argue that the prospect of peace ideally needs to challenge
the fears, deprivations and isolations of groups by bringing them together,
but the very process of peace-building and the possibility of a settlement
creates a sense of anxiety as it entails the questioning and redefinition of
the actors’ understanding of the other and a reconfiguration of group
relations. Therefore the anxieties arising from the very prospect of finding
a solution need to be channelled constructively to convert the feelings of
ontological insecurity they engender into a feeling of ontological security.
This analysis points to a gaping hole in the mainstream approach of Track
One peace-building, as ignoring ontological (in)security limits its capacity
to deal with the affective, emotional, and perceptual realm of peacebuilding.

278

Chapter Twelve

The process of peace-building and conflict resolution entails practices
that challenge and try to change the narratives of, feelings towards, and
understandings of the “other.” The desire to protect a “sense of self” can
be the basis from which old conflicts become new (Campbell, 1998), and a
peace treaty may fail to transform into a sustainable environment of peace
and security owing to a lack of grassroots support. Even though peacemaking might be achieved at the “state” level once an agreement on
governance is reached among elites, the ontological foundations of the
conflict requiring reconciliation at the societal level need to be addressed
through civil society initiatives and CBMs that can create a sense of
ownership for peace and provide a space to reconfigure self-other
relationships in a reflexive manner.
As we have seen, identity and self-narratives are formed and sustained
through both material and personal relationships. Actors reproduce
ontological security by routinizing their relations with both enemies and
friends (Mitzen, 2006). Thus the ultimate attainment of “peace” requires a
fundamental transformation of the self, which is not an easy task.
According to Kay (2012), insecurities created by peace-making can partly
be alleviated by practices that appear epiphenomenal, such as truth
commissions and Cold War history panels. These can be essential
components of change because they help groups achieve reflexive
routinization. Track One level peace-building needs civil society to initiate
and sustain reflexive routinization, and confidence building practices that
support reconfiguration of collective narratives to address the anxieties
that trigger ontological insecurity.
The discussion now turns to the application of one particular process
that seeks to produce the transformations necessary to produce ontological
security following a peace settlement.

3. Methodology: Deliberative Collective Wisdom
The Peace and Reconciliation Active Dialogue Network (ADN) was
established through the “ENGAGE-Do Your Part for Peace”10 project as a
thematic multi-sector representative network. The framework of the
network was established to bring together a diverse range of individuals
and decision makers to diagnose and discuss issues with regards to peace
and reconciliation and subsequently recommend and prioritize CBMs. The
Peace and Reconciliation ADN concentrated on discussing the current
situation facing Cypriots with the aim of finding a comprehensive solution
10

For more on the project see http://www.mc-med.eu/2012-02-28-09-43-21

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

279

to the Cyprus conflict, the ways to overcome the current deadlock in the
negotiations, and specifically the kind of CBMs that would contribute to
reconciliation efforts. The main objective of the ADN was to create an
alternative civic platform that could openly discuss and suggest
confidence-building measures and develop them in a more participatory
and deliberative way with grassroots support. These could in turn promote
ownership of the process leading towards a sustainable and comprehensive
settlement.
The Peace and Reconciliation ADN methodology provides a
democratic, participatory and inclusive platform for facilitated dialogue
engaging both “more people and key people” in the process. The
innovative methodology draws its strength from the “collective wisdom”
and “Structured Dialogic Design Process” developed over 30 years by
Hasan Ozbekan (1970) and Alecos Christakis (see Christakis and Bausch,
2006) that aims to create consensus among participants, and to design
action plans pertaining to a collectively-identified triggering question.11
One of the main criticisms of the reconciliation efforts and bicommunal initiatives in Cyprus is that they are limited to Nicosia and fail
to incorporate people and perspectives outside the capital. According to
the civic map created by the Mahallae initiative, out of 684 bi-communal
civil society projects completed between 1979 and 2013, only 49 were
implemented by CSOs from outside Nicosia or which had branches
outside the capital. 12 There are some underlying reasons for this: most
donor organizations are based in the capital; the capital has three out of the
seven crossing points on the island; the capital historically has a more
lively and dense civil society environment, including trade unions and
chambers of commerce; the remarkable peace demonstrations of the early
2000s were mostly mobilized in the capital; in Nicosia the Green Line is
only a few metres wide, making crossing more time- and cost-efficient.
This creates a sense of dependency on the capital rather than self-reliance
of other towns and villages to sustain reconciliation efforts island-wide.
The ultimate goal of the ADN was to extend reconciliation efforts beyond
Nicosia and to contribute to the peace process in a positive way by
11

The methodology is grounded upon 7 laws:
1. Ashby’s Law of Requisite Variety; 2. Miller’s Law of Requisite Parsimony; 3.
Boulding’s Law of Requisite Saliency; 4. Peirce’s Law of Requisite Meaning; 5.
Tsivacou’s Law of Requisite Autonomy in Decision; 6. Dye’s Law of the
Requisite Evolution of Observations; and 7. Laouris’ Law of Requisite Action. For
more, see http://harnessingcollectivewisdom.com/
12
For more information on the Mahallae civic map see http://mahallae.org/projectdetails-view

280

Chapter Twelve

bringing the communities of Cyprus closer together and moving towards a
comprehensive solution on the island, and by producing a representative
grassroots policy paper that could show the way forward and recommend
CBMs prioritized by the two main communities of the island.
The Peace and Reconciliation ADN introduced the work of ENGAGE
and bi-communal work to rural communities through ADN meetings and
ENGAGE-On-the-Move events. Bridging the gap between rural and urban
areas was inherent in the work of the thematic ADNs in general and
crucial for the Peace and Reconciliation ADN in particular. One of the
main strategies for the ADNs has been their collaboration and co-operation
with local authorities and CSOs through rural ADN meetings to ensure
ownership, sustainability and greater impact, as well as creating strategic
partnerships with rural organizations and local government. By involving
local opinion leaders as a means of promoting ownership and empowerment
within rural communities, the ADN aspired to build a constituency for
peace and to create a more inclusive environment for constructive public
deliberation.
The efforts of the ADN started with a bi-communal agenda-setting
meeting and continued with eight mono-communal meetings (four in each
community) in different locations across the island. The process concluded
with a final bi-communal meeting in the Nicosia buffer zone attended by
selected representatives from both communities. The mono-communal
meetings were particularly significant in involving those who did not feel
comfortable in expressing themselves in English. The efforts of the ADN
and the subsequent policy paper were followed by a survey of participants
that sought to decide on the priority of the various CBMs that had been
suggested at the ADN meetings in order to provide a more representative
picture of the feelings of participants. The final meeting was used to turn
the findings and priorities into tangible action-oriented projects.
The Peace and Reconciliation ADN meetings included 66 Turkish
Cypriots and 53 Greek Cypriots and took place in both Nicosia and rural
areas.13 In addition to the face-to-face rural ADN workshops, prioritization
exercises were developed using two online surveys, face-to-face
questionnaires, and an ad hoc meeting in Famagusta, held in order to open
up participation to more individuals to increase inclusivity in order to
support and strengthen advocacy efforts. For the sake of methodological
cogency and coherence, the charts below focus only on the ADN meeting
results. Following the mapping exercises and diagnosis at the ADN
13

Rural meetings included Paphos/Baf, Larnaca/Larnaka, Limassol/Leymosun,
Deryneia/Derinya,
AyiosEpiktitos/Çatalkoy,
AyiosSergios/Yenibo÷aziçi,
Morphou/Güzelyurt and Dikomo/Dikmen

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

281

workshops, participants created a list of recommendations based on the
issues they had identified. Fifteen CBM recommendations were generated
by the Greek Cypriot and 34 by the Turkish Cypriot participants. The
ADN participants were then asked to prioritize these and then vote
(individually) for the five recommendations that they thought were the
most urgent and that would best facilitate progress. The prioritization
exercises were done mono-communally for the recommendations
generated by the participants of each community; the common priority
CBM analysed in this chapter was independently recommended and
prioritized by both communities.
The two tables below show the top five CBMs prioritized by the ADN
participants. It should be noted that the greater consensus among Greek
Cypriot participants is mainly due to the smaller number of recommended
CBMs.

4. Analysis of the Findings
The policy paper that was drafted, based on the priorities set as a result of
the votes in each meeting and the contributions from the survey
participants, garnered widespread support both from ADN participants and
from the project associates and local partners. The three issues that
gathered the most votes among Cypriots were:
x

x

x

Island-wide Priority: Translation of all formal documents and signs
related to central and local government offices into Turkish and
translation of all road signs into three languages. 23 percent of
Turkish Cypriots and 51 percent of Greek Cypriots voted for this
priority.
Turkish Cypriot Community Priority: The Turkish Cypriot
community should be included in the EU Customs Union, ports should
be opened under EU supervision, Varosha should be handed over to
UN-EU supervision and Turkey should open its ports to the Republic of
Cyprus. 46% percent voted for this priority.
Greek Cypriot Community Priority: Design a new campaign to
promote the benefits of reconciliation: “Seeing through bi-communal
lenses.” 60 percent voted for this priority.

The island-wide Priority: Translation of all formal documents and signs
related to central and local government offices into Turkish and
translation of all road signs into three languages (Turkish, Greek and
English).

Chapter Twelve

282

Table 2

Top Five TC Priorities
TCc should be included in the EU Customs
Union, the Ports should be opened under EU
supervision, Turkey should open its ports to the
RoC, Turkey’s negotiations process should move
forward, and Varosha should be handed over to
UN-EU supervision
GSM operators to work on both sides of the
island
Preparation of common history books
Cooperation on natural reserves and energy
(water, natural gas, electricity, etc.)
Translation of all formal documents and signs
related to central and local government offices
into Turkish
Number of participants

Guzelyurt/
Morphou

Yenibogazici/
Ayios Seryios

Catalkoy/
Ayios
Epiktitos

Dikmen
/
Dikomo

Total
%

100%

83.3%

27.8%

30.0%

26.1%

267.2

100%

16.7%

38.9%

20.0%

26.1%

201.7

44.4%

50.0%

33.3%

30.0%

17.4%

175.2

22.2%

33.3%

22.2%

60.0%

21.7%

159.5

44.4%

33.3%

16.7%

0.0%

43.5%

137.9

9

6

18

10

23

66

Core
Group

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

Top 5 GC Priorities
A new campaign to promote benefits of
reconcilitation: "seeing through bi-communal
lenses"
Translation of all formal documents and signs
related to central and local government offices
into Turkish

283

Larnaca /
Larnaka

Paphos / Baf

Limassol /
Limasol

Derynia
/
Derinya

Total
%

75.0%

88.9%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

463.9

Core
Group

83.3%

83.3%

87.5%

75.0%

85.7%

414.9

Design of a joint strategy for a new peace process
that includes all stakeholders

75.0%

39.0%

100.0%

87.5%

71.4%

372.8

Introduction of Greek and Turkish languages to
formal and non-formal education environments

83.3%

50.0%

75.0%

75.0%

85.7%

369.0

Organise visist by GCc/TCc civil society to high
profile bodies (i.e. Turkish/Greek government
officials, TCc/GCc authorities, EU institutions
and etc.)

50.0%

83.3%

37.5%

50.0%

57.1%

278.0

Number of participants

12

18

8

8

7

53

284

Chapter Twelve

The results of the prioritization exercise gave this as the top
recommendation by both Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot ADN
participants.1
This island-wide priority is important for both communities for
numerous reasons, including trust building, practicality and legal
considerations. Article 3 of the 1960s constitution states that the official
languages of the Republic of Cyprus are Greek and Turkish, and that all
official documents must be published in both languages. However, even
though it is possible to find some documents in Turkish many others are
still published only in Greek. Ensuring that all official documents are
published in Turkish will allow easier access to the institutions and
authorities of the Republic of Cyprus for Turkish Cypriots and will fulfil
the legal provisions of the 1960s constitution of the Republic of Cyprus. In
addition, it will create a stronger sense of a multilingual society and
diminish the difficulties created by language barriers. Furthermore, the
translation of road signs into three languages will have many positive
impacts on the two communities island-wide. Implementation and
promotion of this CBM in the Turkish Cypriot community is particularly
significant for the Greek Cypriot community and will symbolize that the
cultural heritage of the island is protected.
Translation of documents and road signs is important as it demonstrates
a common interest in reunifying the island. Apart from being a sign of
good will, the trilingual road signs will make the lives of drivers easier.
Furthermore, the visibility of such an action will be strong and longlasting. Even though there are concerns with regards to the cost of this
recommendation, the Peace and Reconciliation ADN together with its
local partners can achieve it through small steps and pilot projects taken in
close collaboration with the local authorities. The success of pilot projects
will create a snowball effect inspiring both donors and decision makers to
pursue similar initiatives.

1

In the prioritization exercise for the Turkish Cypriot community, 27 percent of
ADN participants (44 percent of the Core Group, 33 percent of Morphou, 17
percent of Ayios Seryios, none of Ayios Epiktitos, 43 percent of Dikomo and 22
percent of Famagusta participants) voted for this priority. In the Greek Cypriot
community, 83 percent of ADN participants (83 percent each of the Core Group
and Larnaca, 88 percent of Paphos, 75 percent of Limassol and 86 percent of
Deryneia participants) voted for this priority.

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

285

The Turkish Cypriot Community Priority: The Turkish Cypriot
community should be included in the EU Customs Union; ports should be
opened under EU supervision; Varosha should be handed over to UN-EU
supervision and Turkey should open its ports to the Republic of Cyprus.2
The majority of the Peace and Reconciliation ADN members agreed that
the inclusion of the Turkish Cypriot Community in the EU Customs Union
would promote economic integration within the island and facilitate a
sustainable and comprehensive solution to the protracted problem. The
ADN members thought that the ports in the northern part of Cyprus should
be opened to international traffic under EU supervision, which will
necessitate the concurrent opening of ports and the airspace of Turkey to
the Republic of Cyprus, thus improving the Turkey-EU negotiations
process and be a move towards normalizing Turkey-Republic of Cyprus
relations. The ADN members added that Varosha should be handed over
to the United Nations, as clearly stated in various Security Council
Resolutions,3 in order for it to be re-opened and returned to its original
inhabitants with both United Nations and European Union assistance. This
would not only create economic growth and investment in the town, but
would also contribute significantly to a comprehensive settlement. By
building trust, with good planning and vision, a revitalized Varosha could
become a model of synergy and coexistence. The ADN participants agreed
that these three measures were inter-connected and should be advocated as
a package to help bring about a breakthrough in the stalled peace
negotiations.

2

According to the prioritization exercise 49 percent of the ADN participants (100
percent of the Core Group, 83 percent of Morphou, 28 percent of Ayios Seryios,
30 percent Ayios Epiktitos, 26 percent Dikomo and 28 percent of Famagusta
participants) 45 percent of the online survey respondents and 25 percent of the
face-to-face questionnaire respondents voted for this priority.
3
See UNSC S/RES/550 1984, UNSC S/RES/789 1992 and UNSC S/RES/902
1994

286

Chapter Twelve

The Greek Cypriot Community Priority: A new campaign called
"Seeing through bi-communal lenses" which aims to promote the benefits
of reconciliation.4
This priority received great attention as it emerged as a result of a
deliberative process at the grassroots level; and it directly reflects the
needs and interests of voices that had hitherto been missing, as the
majority of participants did not have any previous bi-communal
experience. The campaign of “seeing through bi-communal lenses” would
investigate and promote the benefits of reconciliation, (including the
economic ones) by targeting strategic audiences. The participants stressed
the importance of short-term small accomplishments and the need for a
well-focused effort to demonstrate both sides’ commitment to peace.
Nevertheless, the participants in the process expressed two main
cautions. The first was in relation to the cost of some of the priorities, such
as the translation of signs and documents; and the second concerned
doubts about the efficacy of targeting priorities that could be implemented
by local communities and local authorities without endorsement from
political leaders and elites, whose lack of support could hinder and
significantly slow down the efforts of the ADN.
Advocating the priorities of the ADNs is important for bridging the
gap between Track One and Track Two level peace-building and for
maintaining the momentum and motivation for the continuation of the
reconciliation efforts on the island. This is not only the will of the Cypriot
communities as evidenced by the work of the ADNs and other public
opinion polls 5 but is also the will of the international community that
desires to see a peaceful and reunited island.6 For Cyprus to achieve peace
and stability, the active participation in the process of as many people as
4

In the prioritization exercise, 80 percent of ADN participants (75 percent of Core
Group, 89 percent of Larnaca, 63 percent of Paphos, 75 percent of Limassol and
100 percent of Deryneia participants), 66 percent of the online survey respondents
and 74 percent of the ad hoc Nicosia meeting participants have voted for this
priority.
5
For example, see Centre for Sustainable Peace and Democratic Development
http://www.seedsofpeace.eu/ (Cyprus, 2015)
6
See the statements and mandates of various international organisations, such as
UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus http://www.betterworldcampaign.org/unpeacekeeping/missions/cyprus.html; The European Commission Representation in
Cyprus http://ec.europa.eu/cyprus/index_en.htm; or The EU Observer
https://euobserver.com/foreign/123097.

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

287

possible is crucial. This would mean that the political negotiations at the
Track One level are complemented with a parallel process of grassroots
reconciliation and confidence building through representative and
inclusive civil society efforts.

Conclusion
How do the results from ADNs relate to the theoretical
framework?
The findings presented in the case study are parallel to the theoretical
framework that identifies feelings of security, self-identity and trust as the
main pillars of achieving sustainable peace. The island-wide priority,
which recommended that road signs should be translated into three
languages, would demonstrate a will to recognize the distinct identity of
each community and at the same time build trust by allowing the use of
each other’s language out of respect, as well as for convenience. This
priority comports well with the view that “ontological security is an
emotive identification and not always an overt cognitive experience”
(Noble, 2005), as it is about the trust we have in the continuity of our selfidentity and in our social and material environments of action (Giddens,
1990: 92). By changing road signs and official documents we can, in part,
transform daily routines that reinforce and reproduce our ontological
security by inserting a part of the “other’s” identity into those routines and
material environment.
Furthermore, achieving progress on the Turkish Cypriot priority would
contribute to the elimination of the security concerns of Turkish Cypriots.
It would alleviate their sense of isolation by allowing them to integrate
into the international community and provide them with a sense of
legitimacy, while also addressing the fear of both communities of the
potential escalation of the conflict. This is in line with the argument that
conflicts are not only about territorial, boundary, and sovereignty issues,
but also about acknowledgment, representation, and legitimization of
different identities, as well as ways of living, being, and making meaning
(LeBaron, 2003; Broome et al., 2012). The normalization of relations
between the Republic of Cyprus and Turkey would go a long way to
reduce fears of conflict escalation.
The Greek Cypriot priority of an awareness campaign to inform people
about the benefits of achieving peace would address the fear of “losing
out” both economically and politically, as well as their fears about Turkey
(see Faustmann, 2004). This is in line with the contention that if the

288

Chapter Twelve

prospect of peace challenges the fears and deprivations of groups by
bringing them together, and the very process of peace-building and the
possibility of a settlement thus creates a sense of anxiety and ontological
insecurity, then this confidence-building priority would constructively
channel the prospect of finding a solution to move from a feeling of
ontological insecurity to one of security (Zarakol, 2010, Rumelili 2010).
The categorical difference between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot priorities (one being relatively vague; the other more ambitious) is
a reflection of the different ontological security needs of the two
communities. As demonstrated in the Annan Plan referendum, the Greek
Cypriots are not sure if any accord with the Turkish Cypriots will make
them better off, and they are concerned not to risk what they have secured
as the legitimate government of Cyprus. Their ontological security rests on
this legitimacy and sovereignty that has provided them with biographical
continuity and safety for their self-identity. Therefore, the ADN
participants suggested seeking to alleviate the fears of the Greek Cypriots
by having members of their own community explain to them the benefits
of a solution, especially as some of the ADN participants themselves were
unsure of what might happen and therefore very cautious. Turkish
Cypriots, on the other hand, as they demonstrated in the Annan Plan
referendum, are eager to reach a solution that will legitimize their current
self-government in their own territory and also help maintain their distinct
Turkish Cypriot identity by lifting the isolation they face as a result of
non-recognition. Their ontological security is challenged by lack of
legitimacy and recognition, which in turn challenges their biographical
continuity as Turkish Cypriots. Thus their priority seeks to remedy their
ontological insecurities.
It would not be an oversimplification to say that both sides want to
consolidate what they already have. However, their initial positions
diverge. Since the Annan Plan, the Greek Cypriots in general believe they
will allay their fears and secure their hegemony over Cyprus by not
accepting a new partnership agreement. Turkish Cypriots on the other
hand, in general believe they will manage to keep what they already have
and not lose their identity and self-rule. Maintaining appropriate distance
from domination by either the Greek Cypriots or Turkey would be
achieved by signing an agreement which would be accepted by the Greek
Cypriots and endorsed by both Turkey and the international community.
The different ontological security needs can explain the ambitious highly
politicized CBMs proposed by the Turkish Cypriot participants and vague
and low profile CBMs proposed by Greek Cypriot participants. It is
perhaps not coincidental that, as we were writing this chapter the Turkish

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

289

Cypriots once again demonstrated their strong will to solve the Cyprus
problem by electing a new leader Mustafa Aknc as their President.
Aknc based his campaign on achieving a comprehensive solution to the
Cyprus Problem, supporting CBMs, and indicating his support for the
opening of Varosha for its original owners and giving some kind of
legitimacy to the port of Famagusta and Ercan airports and opening them
to use by all Cypriots. Soon after his election the talks between the two
sides restarted with a more positive atmosphere on both sides of the green
line.
In summary, failing to understand and consider the nuances of identity
and its connection to ontological security, plus the latter’s link with peacebuilding has kept the Cyprus problem deadlocked for over four decades.
Peace building and reconciliation efforts in Cyprus have also suffered
from peace fatigue, failed to achieve tangible outcomes at the Track One
level, and suffered from criticisms related to their legitimacy and
inclusiveness. In this regard, the chapter has made two main contributions;
one theoretical and one empirical.
The theoretical contribution is to expand the field of conflict resolution
by incorporating the literature on ontological security within it. This
literature is beginning to produce a valuable framework for analysis in
international relations and conflict resolution. Considering ontological
security can also help inform policy-making and peace-building by
exposing fears and anxieties and locating their causes in order to propose
effective ways of transforming relationships.
The empirical contribution focuses on an innovative methodology that
relates the theory to practice. The ADN methodology employed by the
ENGAGE project focused on involving and opening channels of
communication, particularly in rural areas, between “key people and more
people” by providing an open and participatory platform for dialogue and
deliberation. Rural communities, civil society activists, academics, opinion
makers, business people, and central and local authorities came together
both mono-communally and bi-communally with the aim of enhancing
understanding, trust and reconciliation between the two communities in
Cyprus, and of producing a joint and representative policy paper detailing
confidence building priorities. These confidence building priorities not
only illustrate the operation of the theoretical framework, but also reflect
the outcome of efforts towards grassroots reconciliation by documenting
initiatives that take nuances of identity and ontological security seriously.

290

Chapter Twelve

References
Websites and Online Sources
Cyprus 2015 (Seeds of Peace, SeeD: Investigating the Future: An in-depth
study of Public Opinion in Cyprus
http://www.seedsofpeace.eu/research/participatory-polling/item/41investigating-the-future-an-in-depth-study-of-public-opinion-incyprus-december-2009-turkish%3E
Cyprus Community Media Centre (CCMC):
http://www.cypruscommunitymedia.org/%3E
Cyprus Island-wide Development NGO Platform (CYINDEP):
http://www.trialog.or.at/cyprus%3E
Eurobarometer (2013) Standard EB 79 Fact Sheet: Spring 2014, (CY-TCc)
in GESIS Data Archive (ed.) Standard Eurobarometer 79 Brussels:
GESIS Data Archive TNS pp. 1-4.
—. (2014) Standard EB 81 Fact Sheet: Spring 2014, (CY-TCc) in GESIS
Data Archive (ed.) Standard Eurobarometer 81 Brussels: GESIS Data
Archive TNS pp. 1-4.
Home for Co-operation: http://www.home4cooperation.info/%3E
Mahallae Civic Mapping: The goals and impact of civil society
contributions to peace building in Cyprus:
http://mahallae.org/peacemap-home
United Nations Good Offices Mission Working Groups and Technical
Committees:
http://www.uncyprustalks.org/nqcontent.cfm?a_id=2484%3E
United Nations Security Council (S/PRST/2008/9 17 April 2008)
Statement by the President of the Security Council:

http://www.un.org/en/sc/documents/statements/2008.shtml
News Articles and Media
Anastasiou, Angelos, (2015) Turkey issues new NavTex, Cyprus Mail 8
January, acessed 12 May 2015
http://cyprus-mail.com/2015/01/08/turkey-issues-new-navtex/.
BBC (2015) Cyprus “spurns historic chance”, BBC World News 25 April
2004, accessed 1 February 2015
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/3656753.stm%3E.
Yeniduzen (2014) Derya'nn sözleri meclise damgasn vurdu [The
parliament shook with Derya's words], Yenidüzen 16 December,
accessed 1 May 2015

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

291

http://www.yeniduzen.com/Haberler/haberler/deryanin-sozlerimeclise-damgasini-vurdu/45367.

Books and Articles
Adamides, Constantinos and M. Costas Constantinous (2011) Comfortable
conflict and (il)liberal peace in Cyprus, in O. Richmond and A.
Mitchell (eds) Hybrid Forms of Peace: From Everyday Agency to
Post-Liberalism, London: Palgrave Macmillan: 242-58.
Aktar, Ayhan, Niyazi Kzlyürek and Umut Özkrml (2010) Nationalism
in the Troubled Triangle: Cyprus, Greece and Turkey London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Anastasiou, Harry (2008) The Broken Olive Branch: Nationalism, Ethnic
Conflict, and the Quest for Peace in Cyprus in Vol. II Nationalism
versus Europeanization Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
BarǦTal, Daniel (2000) From intractable conflict through conflict
resolution to reconciliation: Psychological analysis, Political
Psychology Vol 21 No 2: 351-365.
Bayart, J.-F. (1986). Civil Society in Africa. Political domination in Africa.
P. Chabal, Cambridge University Press.
Behnke, A. (2006). "No way out: Desecuritization, emancipation and the
eternal return of the political—a reply to Aradau." Journal of
International Relations and Development 9(1): 62-69.
Broome, Benjamin (1998) Overview of conflict resolution activities in
Cyprus: Their contribution to the peace process, The Cyprus Review
Vol 10 No 1: 47-66.
Broome, Benjamin J., Maria Hadjipavlou, Harry Anastasiou and Bülent
Kanol (2012) Opening Communication Pathways in Protracted
Conflict: From Tragedy to Dialogue in Cyprus, in Lawrence Frey &
Kevin Carragee (eds.) Communication Activism as Engaged
Scholarship Volume 3: Struggling for Social Justice Amidst Difference
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Browning, Christopher S. and Pertti Joenniemi (2013) From fratricide to
security community: Re-theorising difference in the constitution of
Nordic peace, Journal of International Relations and Development Vol
16 No 4: 483-513.
Campbell, David (1998) Writing Security: United States Foreign Policy
and the Politics of Identity Minnessota: University of Minnesota Press.
Christakis, Alexander N. and Kenneth C. Bausch (2006) How People
Harness Their Collective Wisdom And Power To Construct The Future
In Co-Laboratories Of Democracy USA: Information Age Publishing.

292

Chapter Twelve

Christou, George (2010) The European Union, borders and conflict
transformation: the case of Cyprus, Cooperation and Conflict Vol. 45
No. 1: 55-79.
—. (2012) The European Commission as an actor in the Cyprus conflict,
Journal of European Integration Vol. 1 No. 17: 117-133.
Cohen, Jean L. (1994) Civil Society and Political Theory Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Constantinou, Costas M. (2007) Aporias of identity: Bicommunalism,
hybridity and the “Cyprus problem”, Cooperation and Conflict Vol. 42
No. 3: 247-270.
Diez, Thomas and Nathalie Tocci (2009) Cyprus: A Conflict at the
Crossroads Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Foley, M. W. and B. Edwards (1996). "The Paradox of Civil Society."
Journal of Democracy 7(3): 38-52
Gallagher, T. (2004). "After the war comes peace? An examination of the
impact of the Northern Ireland conflict on young people." Journal of
Social Issues 60(3): 629-642.
Gawerc, Michelle I. (2006) PeaceǦbuilding: Theoretical and concrete
perspectives, Peace & Change, Vol. 31 No. 4: 435-78.
Giddens, Anthony (1990) The Consequences of Modernity Cambridge:
Polity Presss.
Gürkaynak, Esra Çuhadar C. (2007) Track two diplomacy from a track
one perspective: Comparing the perceptions of Turkish and American
diplomats, International Negotiation Vo. 12 No. 1: 57-82.
Hadjipavlou, Maria (2010) Women and Change in Cyprus: Feminisms and
Gender in Conflict London: I.B. Tauris.
—. (2012) The third alternative space: Bi-communal work in divided
Cyprus, Palestine-Israel Journal Vo. 18 No. 23: 102-12.
Hadjipavlou, Maria and Bülent Kanol (2008) The Impacts of
Peacebuilding Work on the Cyprus Conflict. Reflecting On Peace
Practice Project. Boston, MA: Collaborative Learning Projects (CDA)
Hatay, Mete and Rebecca Bryant (2008) The jasmine scent of Nicosia: Of
returns, revolutions, and the longing for forbidden pasts, Journal of
Modern Greek Studies Vo. 26 No. 2: 423-49.
Jarraud, Nicolas (2012) A practitioner's perspective, Peace Review Vo. 24
No. 4: 438-45.
John, Anthony Wanis-St and Darren Kew (2008) Civil society and peace
negotiations: confronting exclusion, International Negotiation Vol. 13
No. 1: 11-36.

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

293

Kanol, Bülent and Direnç Kanil (2013) Roadblocks to peacebuilding
activities in Cyprus: international peacebuilding actors' handling of the
recognition issue, Journal of Conflictology Vol. 4 No. 2:. 39-47.
Kay, Sean (2012) Ontological security and peace-building in Northern
Ireland, Contemporary Security Policy Vol. 33 No. 2: 236-63.
Kinnvall, Catarina (2004) Globalization and religious nationalism: self,
identity, and the search for ontological security, Political Psychology
Vol. 25 No.5: 741-767.
Kyriacou, Praxoula A., Özlem O÷uz, and Fiona Mullen (2009) The Day
After II: Reconstructing a Reunited Cyprus Oslo: International Peace
Research Institute (PRIO).
LeBaron, M. D. (2003) Bridging Cultural Conflicts: A new Approach for a
changing world San Francisco: Jossey Bass
Lordos, Aleksandros, Erol Kaymak and Natalie Tocci (2009) A people’s
peace in Cyprus: testing public opinion on the options for a
comprehensive settlement, Centre for European Peace Studies (CEPS)
Paperback Series Vol. 2: 1-118.
Lupovici, Amir (2012) Ontological dissonance, clashing identities and
israel’s unilateral steps towards the Palestinians, Review of
International Studies Vol. 38 No. 4: 809-33.
MacGinty, Roger, Orla T. Muldoon and Neil Ferguson (2006) No war, no
peace: Northern Ireland after the agreement, Political Psychology Vol.
28 No. 1: 1-11.
Makriyianni, Chara and Charis Psaltis (2007) The teaching of history and
reconciliation, Cyprus Review Vol. 19 No. 1: 43-69.
Marchetti, Raffaele and Nathalie Tocci (2009) Conflict society:
understanding the role of civil society in conflict Global Change,
Peace & Security Vo. 21 No. 2: 201-17.
McSweeney, Bill. (1996) Identity and security: Buzan and the
Copenhagen School, Review of International Studies Vol. 22 No. 1:
81-94.
—. (1999), Security, Identity and Interests: A Sociology of International
Relations Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Michael, Michális S. (2007) The Cyprus peace talks: a critical appraisal,
Journal of Peace Research Vol. 44 No. 5: 587-604.
Mitzen, Jennifer (2006) Ontological security in World Politics: State
identity and the security dilemma, European Journal of International
Relations Vol. 12 No. 3: 341-70.
Montville, Joseph V. (1987) The arrow and the olive branch: A case for
track two diplomacy, in John McDonald W. and Diane Bendahmane B.

294

Chapter Twelve

(eds.) Conflict resolution: Track two diplomacy Washington DC:
Foreign Service Institute.
Noble, G. (2005) The discomfort of strangers: racism, incivility and
ontological security in a relaxed and comfortable nation, Journal of
intercultural studies Vol. 26 No. 1: 107-20.
Orjuela, Camilla (2003) Building peace in Sri Lanka: A role for civil
society? Journal of Peace Research Vol. 40 No. 2: 195-212.
Paffenholz, Thania and Christoph Spurk (2006) Civil society, civic
engagement, and peacebuilding, Social Development Paper 36
(October).
Papadakis, Yiannis (2008) Narrative, memory and history education in
divided Cyprus: a comparison of schoolbooks on the "History of
Cyprus", History & Memory Vol. 20 No.2: 128-48.
Papadakis, Yiannis, Nios Peristianis and Gisela Welz (eds.) (2006)
Divided Cyprus: Modernity, History, And An Island In Conflict
Indiana: Indiana University Press.
Rakner, L. (1992). Trade Unions in Processes of Democratization: A
Study of Party Labour Relations in Zambia CMI Report, Chr.
Michelsen Institute. Department of Social Science and Development.
Roe, Paul (2008) The Value of Positive Security, Review of International
Studies Vol. 34 No. 4: 777-94.
Rumelili, Bahar (2004) Constructing Identity and Relating to Difference:
Understanding the EU's Mode of Differentiation, Review of
International Studies Vol. 30 No. 1: 27-47.
—. (2015) Identity and desecuritisation: the pitfalls of conflating
ontological and physical security, Journal of International Relations
and Development Vol. 18 No. 1: 52-74.
Spyrou, Spyros (2006) Children Constructing Ethnic Identities, in Yiannis
Papadakis, Nicos Peristianis, and Gisela Welz (ed.), Divided Cyprus:
Modernity, History, and an Island in Conflict Indiana: Indiana
University Press: 121-40.
Steele, Brent. J. (2005) Ontological security and the power of self-identity:
British neutrality and the American Civil War, Review of International
Studies Vol. 31 No. 3: 519-540.
—. (2008), Ontological Security in International Relations: Self-Identity
and the IR State London: Routledge.

Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus

295

Turk, A Marco (2006) Cyprus reunification is long overdue: the time is
right for Track III diplomacy as the best approach for successful
negotiation of this ethnic conflict, Loyola of Los Angeles International
and Comparative Law Review Vol. 28: 205.
Volkan, Vamik (2008) Trauma, Identity and Search for a Solution in
Cyprus, Insight Turkey Vol. 10 No. 4: 95-110.
White, Gordon (1994) Civil society, democratization and development (I):
Clearing the analytical ground, Democratization Vol. 1 No. 2: 375-90.
Wolleh, Oliver (2001) Citizen Rapprochement by the local peace
constituencies: Bi-communal conflict resolution trainers group in
Cyprus Berlin: Berghof Research Center for Constructive Conflict
Management.
Zarakol, Ayúe (2010) Ontological (In)Security and state denial of
historical crimes: Turkey and Japan, International Relations Vol. 24
No. 1: 3-23.
Zartman, I William (2007) Peacemaking in international conflict:
Methods and Techniques Washington, DC: US Institute of Peace Press.

