THE
CYPRUS
REVIEW

,

.

1

.

I-

a j oumal of social, economic and political issues

Eric Neisser
A Federalism Process for Cyprus: An American Constitutional
Perspective on the Cyprus Problem
John A. Koumoulides
Early Forms of Ethnic Conflict in Cyprus: Archbishop Kyprianos of Cyprus

~j

and the War of Greek Independence 1821
Nayia Roussou
Factors of Humanitarian and Mass Culture and Aggression

1I

.­'­.

in Children and Young People

!

i

Harry Anastasiou

1

Conflict Alienation and the Hope of Peace:

I

The Struggle for Peace in Militarised Cyprus

,i

Plus Commentary Articles by:

I

!

i

•

Oliver Richmond and Michael J. Maranda
And Book Reviews of:

Dean Acheson The Cold War Years
Riding with the Lion: In Search of Mystical Christianity
... '

Fall 1996

Volume 8

­­

Number 2

THE
CYPRUS
REVIEW
a journal of social, economic and political issues

Peter Allen, Ph. D., Rhode Island State
College, USA.
Leonard Doob, Ph. D., Yale University,
USA.
Maria Hadjipavlou­Trigeorgis,
Ph. D., Pedagogical Institute, Cyprus.
Yiannis E. Ioannou, Ph. D., University
of Cyprus.
.
Joseph S. Joseph, Ph. D., European
Union Division, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
Joseph S. Josephides, Ph. D., Popular
Bank, Cyprus.
John T.A. Koumoulides, Ph. D., Ball
State University, USA.
Costas P. Kyrris, Ph. D., Ex­Director
of Cyprus Research Center, Cyprus.
Peter Loizos, Ph. D., University of
London, United Kingdom.
Phedon Nicolaides, Ph. D., European
Union Division, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
.
Andreas Polemitis, D.B.A., Intercollege, Cyprus.
Sophronis Sophroniou, Ph. D., Intercollege, Cyprus and University of Indianapolis.

1

CONFLICT, ALIENATION, AND THE HOPE
OF PEACE:
THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN
MILITARISED CYPRUS
Harry Anastasiou

In 1960 the Cyprus Republic was. established as a single, ethnically mixed
bicommunal state, with a single flag and an army numbering merely 2000 men.
Today, Cyprus is geographicalfy, ethnically and communally divided, with foreign
troops on its soil, with all the male members of the population trained as soldiers
and equipped with all powerful, up to date weapons. An island of half a million
inhabitants, Cyprus stands divided since 1974 into de facto two states, one legal
and one illegal, and with four flags; the Cyprus Republic flag and the Greek flag in
the Greek south and the Turkish flag with the flag of the "Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus" in the Turkish occupied north. And for more than thirty years, the
island has been under the direct supervision of the peace­keeping forces of the
United Nations. Briefly, this is the tragedy of Cyprus.
For more than forty years, the history of this island has lived through successive
and varied confictual relationships, even through relationships of violence. In view
of this irrefutable reality, it is essential to reflect and acknowledge that as
inhabitants of the island, we have all been inevitably formed in and through this
history of many and different conflicts. As individuals and as political groups, as
communities and as a culture, we have been haunted and stigmatised, one way or
another, by this protracted, never­ending confrontation with "the others", whoever
they may be, the right, the left, the Greeks or the Turks.
It must also be noted that following the violent events of 1974, the various intracommunal conflictual relationships, especially among the Greek-Cypriots, has been
subsumed and reconstituted around the henceforth major axis of Greek-Cypriot
community on the one hand and Turkish-Cypriot community and the Turkish army
on the other. And by implication. due to the Turkish military invasion and the pain it
induced, the adversarial attitude was generalised. espeCially through the nationalist
prototypes. to one of universal animosity between Greeks and Turks."On both
sides. the same nationalism which originally created the problem comesf' after the
fact. and finds justification in the very historical events which itself ci;eated. It
validates, in other words, the nationalist stereotype that enmity between Greeks
and Turks constitutes a diachronic, invariable and existential fact, an immutable

CONFLICT. ALIENAnON AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MIUTARISED

and eternal phenomenon. This stance, or better, this perspective, whether it
originates from Turk or Greek, leads to the same outcome. It precludes, in
advance, the prospect for peace and reconcitiation. And under these conditions,
the search for a "solution" is transformed into a vain, time­ consuming
preoccupation. Under the nationalist rubric, even if '''the solution" is found on the
diplomatic plain. whatever it may be, even the most ideal, it becomes historically
unfeasible, even most dangerous.
On account of the general impact of nationalism on public culture, the mentality
of "us and them" has been shaped not so much by the historical experiences of
peaceful coexistence and symbiosis, which have indeed existed, but, rather,
exclusively from the events of hostility and violence. The kind of events which the
nationalist spirit. wherever it comes from, onesidedly and selectively prefers and
utilises in constituting its historical hermeneutic, in which the values of man and
civilisation become determined by conflictual prototypes (Anderson 1991, p.6;
Kitromilides 1990). And this is the mentality which has tended to become an
inseparable dimension of the process of socialisation in the established culture of
Cypriot society, in its entirety. inclusive of both communities.
By the nature of things, if peace is to be sought and pursued in Cyprus, it is
imperative to begin with a diagnosis of the dynamics of conflict as they pertain to
both the adversarial attitude itself, and the hostile interactive relationship between
the two communities.
What is of utmost significance as a starting point for peace in Cyprus is the
acknowledgement that each community has its own experience of injustice and
subsequently and by implication its own sense of justice. The difference between
the two, hinges on the fact that the traumatic experiences that each side has
reaped from the conflict refer to ­and derive from different events, incidents and
historical periods. For the Turkish­Cypriots, the painful memories concentrate
mainly on the period 1963­1974. Their recollection concerns the constraining
underdeveloped life in their enclaves, which encompassed just 3% of the territory
of Cyprus, the defeats in the bloody conflicts with the Greek­Cypriots, with a loss of
human life staggering in the eyes of the Turkish­Cypriots as a numerical minority. It
concerns the missing persons (483 Turkish­Cypriots over 32 Greek­Cypriots in
1964) and generally the feelings that they were living under conditions of perpetual
siege (Volkan 1979, pp 18­25, 119).
For the Greek­Cypriots, on the other hand, the experience of injustice originates
mainly from the more concentrated, but inundating events of 1974. with the Greek
Junta's coup d' etat and the Turkish military intervention. The tragic memories refer
to the unprecedented loss of human life, to the mass uprooting from t~ir
homes,
to the
from one moment to the next, to the unrepeatable destruction 01 pro~ty,
refugees and the 1619 missing persons. Most significant is also...the fact that the
pain and injustice that resulted from the coup d' etat, with all the'mixed feelings of
confusion and guilt over the civil bloodshed, were unconsciously transferred and

80

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

fused with the pain induced by Turkey's "Attila" operation. While with the recent reemergence of nationalism, this transference was attempted by certain nationalist
groups almost consciously, as a substitute for their guilt in initiating the civil
violence among the Greek community.
The differentiated traumatic experience of the two communities, through entirely
different points of reference are not only restricted to the different historical periods
to which each side remains selectively and prejudicially bound. They relate and
concur also in the same historical periods and events, but in relation to different
needs and concerns of each community. Presently, for example, the TurkishCypriots', (while feeling secure with the presence of Turkish troops on the island).
attention is primarily focused on the unbearable weight of their deteriorating
economy. On the other hand. the Greek-Cypriots, while prospering in the economic
domain to the point where economic survival is not at all an issue in daily life, are
preoccupied with the pain and the injustice regarding their occupied lands.
Through all these contradictions and ambiguities which reign in the perceptions,
priorities and needs of the two communities, there appears yet another dimension
of the alienation incubated in the history of protracted conflict. It concerns the
selective reference and interpretation of history on the part of each side. This
tendency, while germinating within and by the psychology of conflict, is embraced,
completed. culturally patterned and intensified by a nationalist mentality (Gelner
1983, pp. 48-49; Hobsbawn 1990. pp. 76-77: Anderson 1991. pp. 202-206). Each
side amplifies and projects univocally its own experience of pain and injustice,
while diminishing and burying in the depths of the unconscious. its own guilt and its
own responsibility for aI/ that has occurred and have been perpetrated in history.
It is thus not at all surprising that the Turkish-Cypriots try to entrench their sense
of justice and the corresponding arguments by referring exclusively to the period
prior to 1974, while entirely ignoring the awesome consequences resulting from
Turkey's military invasion (Denktash 1982). But also conversely, it is not surprising
that the Greek-Cypriots, while attempting to render a historical interpretation of the
Cyprus problem. focus for their own sense of justice on the period of 1974 and
thereafter, without any substantial reference to the specific historical events of the
1960s. Here, we encounter two diametrically opposed, historical perspectives and·
memories, which have created and sustained an insurmountable problem of
communication between the two communities, posing thereby a major obstacle to
peace (Papadakis 1994. pp. 401-409).
{.

The Dialectic of Non-communication
f
Consequently. yet another outcome of the relationship of protracted contlict
which has been inherited is the alienation which results from the inablty~f
the two
communities to communicate within a framework ot common points of reference.
The interactions between the two sides, through a history of antagonism and
incidents of violence, have differentiated into exactly opposite patterns the

81

~

t=

"

­ I

CONFLICT, ALIENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MiLlTARISED CYPRUS

I

experiences, the perceptions and the existential structure of meaning from which
each side interprets the various events and behaviours, be they their own or the
other side's. This dynamic leads with almost mathematical precision to an essential
form of alienation which institutionalises psychologically, intellectually and culturally
a dialectic of non­communication between the two communities. This form of
alienation derives from the fact that the meanings which each side attributes to the
various events are diametrically opposite to those attributed by the other. This
condition is pervasive. permeating everything, whether they be events, or
institutions. or speeches, or political decisions, news reports. or historical analyses,
etc.
For example, when the Greek­Cypriots claim the right of the refugees to return
to their homes. (which surely constitutes a human right), the Turkish­Cypriots
interpret it as an attempt by the Greek­Cypriots to take everything for themselves
and throw them to the streets, helpless and without shelter. Their fear of such a
prospect is such that it overshadows their ability to acknowledge that the GreekCypriots claim does in fact concern human rights. On the other hand. when the
Turkish-Cypriots demand recognition of the "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus",
the Greek-Cypriots attribute it exclusively to an arrogant impOSition of the status
quo through the might of arms, to a flagrant violation of justice. Without however
the Greek-Cypriots reflecting on the fact that behind the Turkish-Cypriots claim for
state recognition, which in and of itself is illegitimate, lies a past traumatic
experience of existential fear which triggers a deep need for security and collective
identity. It is precisely this feeling that has been usurped for years by Turkish
nationalism and Turkey. which in turn feeds and sustains Greek nationalism by
provoking the latter to countervailing reactions.
The dialectic of non-communication also holds true in the flying of the Turkish
and Greek flags by the Turkish-Cypriot and Greek-Cypriot communities
respectively. Whereas from an objective historical vantage point, the two flags have
undermined and continue to undermine the state sovereignty of the Cyprus
Republic, subjectively for each community, the symbolism of the flags summarises
and represents meanings and experiences directly opposite to those attributed to
them by the other side. For the Greek-Cypriots. and. especially for extreme
nationalists the Greek flag constitutes a symbol of ethnic pride. glory. grandeur.
collective identity. etc. The equivalent national symbol of the Turkish-Cypriots, that
is the Turkish flag, is viewed by the Greek-Cypriots as a symbo\.~
of shame,
II'
barbarism and darkness. Since 1974 in particular, the Turkish flag contains for the
Greek-Cypriots the meanings of invasion and occupation, of missing persons, of
illegality, of injustice, of violence, of partition and of part of Cyprus.
For the Turkish-Cypriots however, the Turkish flag embodies a symbol of
collective protection, of salvation and support from the motherland. It refers to the
guarantee of their physical security by the all-powerful Turkish state and is a
Turkishreminder of the condition which entrenches the collective identity of t~

82

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

CypriotS. In the eye of the Turkish­Cypriots, the Greek flag, on the other hand, is a
symbol of domination, degradation, oppression, siege and violence. It represents
for them their negative experiences of the 1960s, the backwardness, the perpetual
enslavement, the uncertainty, the missing persons, the union of Cyprus with
Greece. All these meaning patterns of the two sides, which come into conflict
around the national symbols, derive from a series of diachronic associations of
subjective historical memories on the one hand and of nationalist stereotypes on
the other.
The fact that the national flag of each community is the flag of another country,
distinct from Cyprus, complicates the meanings even further. For each side, its
national flag tu rns out to be a symbol of unacceptable claims over the island by
another state which simultaneously supports the unacceptable positions of the
corresponding Cypriot community. Ever since the rise of nationalism on the island,
even after independence and more so in 1974 and thereafter, the Greek­Cypriots
viewed the flying of the flag of Turkey by the Turkish­Cypriots as an abominable
symbol of foreign intervention. And this is exactly how the Turkish­Cypriots viewed
the flying of the flag of Greece by the Greek­Cypriots community, as an extension
of the sovereignty of Greece over the island of Cyprus. These interpretations are
held tacitly but intensely by the Greek­Cypriot and the Turkish­Cypriot
communities, revealing thereby the impasse in communication which results from
the national symbols.
At a deeper level this dialectic of non­communication betrays a form of hypocrisy
which is normally born within the schismatic psychological make­up of nationalism
and the personality which expresses it. Namely. while the flag of "my own" ethnic
group constitutes a necessary, rightful and inalienable symbol of national pride and
justification, the flag of the "other" ethnic group is seen as an unacceptable
phenomenon, a symbol of abomination and high­handedness.
Each community sees its own national flag within an absolutely positive
perspective of idealised meanings. For the· other community, this same flag
functions as a symbol of conflict, injustice, violence and evil. However, the crucial
point is that the relationship between Greek­Cypriots and Turkish­Cypriots. in their
communication through the national symbols, is not determined by the meanings
that each side attributes to its own flag, but to the meanings which each side
attributes to the flag of the other side. Through the national symbols, we thereby
encounter a type of communicative interaction where each cammunity receives
from the other, meanings and messages that each percivs.f'~
and understands
conditions for genuine communication. When we grasp the natior¥:ll symbols, not in
isolation and in the abstract. but in the context of the-~rlaio'nsp
of the two
communities, we see the national flags functioning as symbols of conflict, threat
and militarism. This concrete reality. which supersedes any abstractly attributed
meanings, was once revealed in an innocent observation of a six year Old, who
upon seeing his national flag in a military parade, turned to his father and said,

83

.'.

... .....

..:'.: :.: ,;... ~;.-

CONFLICT, ALIENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MIUTARISEO CYPRUS

!I
!!

i!

f:. I

I

j
. 1

1!
t

I

II

I

i
!

!

I

i

,

I
1

"look, the flag of war"!
Here, the dialectic of non­communication between the two communities, through
a metastasis, is transformed into communication of animosity. This condition which
is created by the interactive psychodynamics of meaning around the national
symbols is reinforced by the fact that consensual symbols of common 'experiences,
of a shared history and of peaceful coexistence between Greek­Cypriots with
Turkish­Cypriots are essentially non­existent. Even the flag of the Cyprus Republic,
as a symbol of bicommunal symbiosis and partnership, remains without substance
in the nationalist historical experience and culture of the two communities, precisely
because in the last analysis it was never supported by a genuine predisposition for
peace and common visions. On the other hand, after 1983, the flag of the "Turkish
Republic of Northem Cyprus" has even less reality and substance than the flag of
the Cyprus Republic, not to mention the further complication that it carries non
intemational recognition .
Moreover, the propaganda which is assembled and disseminated by the means
of mass communication transforms the above mentioned experiences, perceptions
and interpretations from suggestive tendencies and implicit references to
crystallised stereotypes and explicit meanings which integrate and condition public
culture (Ellul 1965, pp. 34­38). Needless to say, this is the general dynamic of the
specific content (McLuhan 1964, pp. 24, 32; Meyrowitz 1985). Under these
conditions, the old stereotypes of nationalism, which are yet again in fury, are
revived partly because in the up­to­date systems of mass communication they find
a perfect alibi by which they become entrenched and proliferate. Apparently,
nationalism finds it own stereotypical and impersonal structure of thought
congruous with the modus operandi of the mass means of communication.
The fact that the two communities no longer have direct contact, through
interpersonal relationships, restricts the entire spectrum of communication to the
abstract level of the mass media. The end result being. that communication occurs
solely in the form of an impersonal exchange of stereotypes. through what by now
have become standardised. mutual accusations, characterisations, victimisation
and a rhetoric based on exaggerated, and often unfounded nationalist
assumptions. And all this takes place outside of any framework of authentic
dialogue, the kind that is mainly attained through direct interpersonal
com·munication. It is a fact that in mass communication people are exposed to a
plethora of information, mass communication of itself is devoid 01 th~
capacity to
build personalities transcending the culture of stereotypes and to foster essential
attitudinal changes in the direction of peace.
.,,'l
The specific language which is standardised in and through the means of mass
communication, especially with the re­emergence of nationalism, is the one which
which is
conditions the content of public culture. Consequently, the way of thin~g
interwoven with this kind of language binds, and often muzzles. anyone who enters
the public realm. In the Greek­Cypriot community this condition occ.urs mostly

84

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

spontaneously, and at times with. a more or less subtle form of state intervention, or
even without intervention, depending on who is in government. More so than not
censorship in the Greek­Cypriot community direct supervision and intervention by
the administrative authorities is more intense and reinforcing. Hence, While in the
case of the Turkish­Cypriots, nationalism in the media culture is a direct extension
of centralised statism, in the case of the Greek­Cypriots, nationalism in the media
occurs as a "free" enterprising mass culture, which in tum reflects, as well as
conditions, political life. It is in this framework that the dynamics of conflict prompt
the Turkish­Cypriots to feel that their authoritarian style of administration in the
Turkish statist tradition is justified as a means of collective survival and protection
from the overwhelming effects of the nationalist, hellenic culture of the Greek
majority. While the Greek­Cypriots, in the very same framework: of conflictual
interaction argue that the Turkish regime of the north undermines democracy
which, in their view, is the prerogative of their government as the sole legitimate
administration of the island.
Free, private broadcasting is not a reality in the Turkish­Cypriot community. But
the rising number of private radio and television stations in the 1990s in the G reekCypriot community did not necessarily generate greater diversity and pluralism in
public opinion. regarding perceptions and perspectives on the Cyprus question. On
the contrary, the overall effect was an intensification of nationalistic messages,
stereotypes and programmes. Along with the more explicit techno-professional and
commercial criteria governing the mode of functioning of the mass media.
nationalism as an implicit criterion on the level of content, begun to operate as the
lowest common denominator in terms of which the broadcasting agencies conduct
their free-enterprising market competition. This is particularly evident when
considering the fact that many political journalists, a lot of whom combine
amateurism with excessive zeal, go about their work thinking that offering
competitive service in the interest of their country amounts to covering events in the
most "patriotic" of spirits.
This dynamic interplay between competing mass media triggers cycles of
interactions. which tend to generate amplifications of nationalist images and a drive
towards a crystallising consolidation of nationalist stereotYpes. Nationalism, in
effect, colours to a lighter or heavier degree. explicitly or implicitly, from the most
extreme church-owned media to the milder semi-public agencies. In this regard, the
critical insight thafthe "freedom" of the mass media need not necessarilY lead to a
democratisation of public opinion is particularly confirmed when open competition
among the media is undertaken in terms of a general nationalism ...which more than
any other image typifies public culture (Ellul 1965, pp. 232-235).
In any case, the standardisation of communication between the two communities
through the mass media and the nationalist stereotypes leads also to a unique form
of alienation in self-communication. It concerns the fact that the Greek-Cypriots
and the Turkish-Cypriots have each created for the most part two languages. One

85

CONFLICT, ALIENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MllITARISED CYPRUS

is a nationalistically predetermined public language, and the other is a personal,
private language. This is a condition which normally appears in social groups which
live and communicate in and through systems of mass propaganda (Ellul 1965, p.

207).
However, concerning the matter of peace, the essential in this dualism is that
while in the public language and culture are projected the expected nationalist.
monolithic stereotypes, in the private word and thought there oft~n
exists genuine
soul­seeking. agony, self­reflection, acknowledgements of faults and a longing for
peace. But the messages of private thinking, which are far more sensitive and
consenting compared to those of the public word. nevet reach the other
community. precisely because they are eclipsed and annihilated by the public word.
What is interesting. but also tragic for the issue of peace, is that whatever positive
experiences of symbiosis and peaceful co­existence between Greek­Cypriots and
Turkish­Cypriots may have been inherited. they are restricted to people's private
and personal memory. While. due to the impact of nationalism. these personal
memories are essentially absent from the public and formal collective memory
which is reflected in Cypriot general culture. For true to the esoteric logic of
nationalism. the part of public culture which refers to the relationship between
Greeks and Turks is constituted abstractly. utilising solely the negative "material" of
history. This holds true for the public culture of both ethnic communities in Cyprus.
The difference lies in the fact that in the Greek­Cypriot community censorship
occurs as private thought is processed more indirectly through the power of public,
nationalist thought, whereas in the Turkish­Cypriot community it is imposed in a
more direct and authoritarian way by the nationalist regime of the Turkish­Cypriot
and Turkish administration.
An imminent danger which is already in sight. derives from the fact that with the
proliferation of electronic means, the messages and images of the mass media are
beginning to saturate society. As the abstract culture of mass communication
surpasses the stage of mere information and becomes established as a
comprehensive and all­inclusive mental environment, the dynamic of this resultant
public culture will have the tendency to swallow and eradicate private and personal
opinion, thought and inner independence (Ellul 1965, pp. 165, 169­171; Meyrowitz
1985. p. 16). And if the public culture of mass communication becomes identified,
among other things, with the reign of nationalist stereotypes. then the IWssibilities
for communication. and consequently for mutual understanding. between the two
communities will radically disappear. And along with this. peace will app;par as an
untenable reality. as an illusory goal.
.::
This issue of mass culture is particularly crucial for the post­1974 generation of
Greek­Cypriots and Turkish­Cypriots, as it involves youths who stand historically
suspended between two realities. On the one hand. while they has no personal
experience of the violence of the past. they also had no positive experience of
symbiosis with their counterpart in the other community. But on the other hand.

!f
86

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

they stand open, exposed and susceptible to a nationalist oriented mass culture,
not to mention mass education, in relation to which the new generation has no way
of conducting its personal reality­test.
All the above indicates that reinforced and direct interpersonal contact between
the two communities constitutes one of the most essential elements and catalysts
for improving the conditions and possibilities for communication. This however has
never been pursued publicly, formally and systematically. With the exception of
some marginal political groups, its task has been left for the most part to the private
initiative of citizens. To those who are always left exposed to the reactionary
criticisms of nationalists from whom the leadership of the two communities never
managed to become decisively disengaged. All those who fiercely object to
interpersonal contact. either indirectly through a portion of Greek­Cypriot public
opinion, or more directly through intervention from' the Turkish­Cypriot
administration, understand, perhaps, the positive power of interpersonal contact.
For certainly, the enhancement and entrenchment of positive contacts would leave
the most nationalistically inclined person in each community exposed to their own
insufficiency through their enslavement to permanent animosity.
The Preservation of the Conflictual Relationship
Yet another factor of alienation lies in the fact that the conflictual relationship
between the two communities has become institutionalised and is maintained both
as an experience and as a value in the prevailing establishment of Cypriot society.
The Greek­Cypriots and the Turkish­Cypriots continuously, and in a variety of
ways, invest materially and psychologically in sustaining the conflict. Already,
since decades ago, they have invested human lives and blood. Today they
continue to invest millions in armaments. Moreover, they invest knowledge,
energy, time and the most formative years of all their youths, who are obliged to do
compulsory military service. Education, the means of mass communication, most
. political speeches, even cultural expressions, all these, are oriented to the pain
and the injustice, but also to the consolidation and the reproduction of the
conflictual relationship between the two communities, and beyond, between the two
respective nations. The pain and grief of the past, while certainly touching the
human dimension of the problem, are assimilated and transformed by nationalism
into a justification for prolonging and intensifying animosity and the Iauthoritarian
type of attitude, especially in the collective mentality of the younger generations.
Increasingly, the manNer in which the mass media process and project~h
Cyprus
problem, tends to convert the search for justice into a catalys....for enhancing an
aggressive, violent and militarist spirit This reinforces not so much the physical,
but the invisible psychological wall which divides the two communities. ~
Especially with the re­emergence of nationalism in the 19905, one observes that
conflictual prototypes, extreme warlike speeches, and perceptions. begin to
permeate Cypriot culture, distancing yet further the worlds of the two communities.

87

T
CONFLICT, ALIENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MlliTARISED CYPRUS

I

I
I

,I

i

I

,
f

l
f

This is particularly evident in the repeated paralysis, and often absolute impasse,
experiences on the formal political plane, which is not solely due to factors within
the diplomatic sphere. All along, the orientation of society as a whole tended
towards conflict while awaiting for a handful of politicians to find a solution.
Ironically, the current relapse of explicit nationalism is occurring at a time which the
confluence of cert?in international events, particularly vis­a­vis the European
Union, seem to favour the reaching of a political settlement.
. The spirit of nationalism presents, possibly, the most comprehensive and
complete perspective of the adversarial mentality. For in the absence of restraining
exogenous factors, it naturally leads to absolute confrontation between the two
communities, as it intensifies suspicion and anger through its inherent
irrationalities. Due to its narcissistic and utopian nature, nationalism creates an
insurmountable contradiction between the public culture it influences on the one
hand, and the diplomatic effort on the other. In essence, it concerns the radical
discrepancy between ideology, or better, myth and reality.
For example, while in formal politics the Greek­Cypriots espouse a bizonal, bicommunal federation, extreme nationalism declares that all of Cyprus is Greek. In
politics the Greek­Cypriots cfaim that they desire the restoration of the Cyprus
Republic, but nationalism exhibits symbols and slogans which undermine and
nullify the independent state status of Cyprus. While in diplomacy it is asserted
that the sole objective is the settlement of the problem through negotiations,
nationalism and the culture it represents utters triumphant words in warmongering
speeches and in documentaries on ethnic "epics" depicting idealised military
virtues, even with the sanction of the Orthodox Church. There is a determined
pursuit of gaining entry into the European Union, but nationalism is preconditioned
by visions of a monoethnic state. The term "union" and related words, have since
1974 been dropped from the formal political vocabulary of the Greek­Cypriots.
Nationalism between, shapes and conditions behaviour in such a way as to give
the impression that Cyprus is but a province of Greece. In (ormal politics there is
an appeal to "human rights" for each and every citizen, but in the nationalist
mentality pervades a chauvinistic and xenophobic tendency which rejects. in
advance, the "other", which happens to be culturally different. There is a conscious
pursuit of aligning social institutions to the European model, while tiationalism
enhances ethnocentric and monoethnic public education.
.
..t

:

The Comprehensiveness and Transcendence of the Spi}lt of Peace
In contrast to the collective narcissism and absolute egocntri~m
of the
nationalist mentality, the spirit of peace follows the comprehensive appro'ach to the
phenomenon of human conflict, in a manner that embraces .impartially all the
antitheses and ambiguities of the problem. The spirit of peace transposes the
historical events into a new perspective, with the courage to reorder and redefine
the injustices and the violence, whatever their origin, wfrile simultanequsly

88

j
t

t
1
1

1

. r

)
1.
I

(

\

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

i

acknowledging the need for justice for any and aU concerned. This transposition
presupposes a transcendent stance, within a hard, and certainty painful realism,
simultaneously intertwined with an all­embracing compassion founded on inner
spiritual strength (King 1982, pp. 9, 15­16). Moreover, it also entails a coming to
consciousness of the fact that protracted animosity and conflict with "the other" is
directly linked to inner tensions and conflicts within one's very own self (Sandole
1993, p. 16). This understanding outlines a new form of struggle which requires far
more existential courage than the type which is propagated by the idealised,
militarist prototypes of nationalism. And this is precisely because the struggle in
the spirit of peace battles not only one, but two enemies. One is the evil and the
injustice that has been induced by the "the other", by the side of the opponent. The
other enemy is the evil and the injustice that has been committed by oneself, by
one's own group. In the battle for peace therefore, one front is outside and the
other front is within oneself, where one has no face to confront one's own hatred,
one's own instinct for vengeance, one's own fanaticism, one's own nationalism.
What does this form of struggle for peace mean in practice for Cyprus? If the
Greek­Cypriots in the spirit of peace, are to oppose the illegal Turkish­Cypriot state
and the regime of occupation in the north, they must at the same time convince all
concerned by word, actions, deeds and especially by attitude. that the TurkishCypriots are exposed to no physical danger from the Greek-Cypriots. Further,
though the Greek-Cypriots may not recognise the "TurkiSh Republic of Northern
Cyprus", they may recognise unreservedly the existence of the Turkish-Cypriot
community, with the common but also different cultural elements which
characterise it in relation to the Greek-Cypriots. Similarly, if the Greek-Cypriots are
concerned to preserve their cultural heritage, (which ought not be confused with the
perpetuation of nationalism), they must be simultaneously concerned as a
community and especially as civil society, with the conservation of the cultural
heritage of all the ethnic groups of Cyprus, including that of the Turkish-Cypriot
community. The preservation of cultural heritages cannot in essence be achieved
through antagonistic relations. precisely because the conflictual nature of the
antagonistic spirit falsifies civilisation. For as it ushers into civilisation primitive
drives, aggressive instincts. mass excitations, militarism, chauvinism and the
fanatical personality. it proceeds to exalt them. establishing them as socially
acceptable virtues. This transformation of destructive primitive urges to accredited
popular values has always been a constitutive part of the legacy of ellery
kind of
,[:'.
nationalism.
'.
.
J',

,\

Again. within the meaning of the struggle for peace, if the Greek-Cyp-riots are to
enhance the human rights of their own community at those jurretures where they
have been undermined. where Greek-Cypriots have been pained and have
lamented, they must also support the human rights of the Turkish-Cypriots
respectively. precisely at those points where, in their own unique historical
and as
experience. they too have been hurt and have lamented, both as indvy~ls

89

"

. ..: ~:

· ..

........ : -.'~:

~

CONFLICT. ALIENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MIUTARISED CYPRUS

!
I

I
I

I
i

I
!
i
I

1
t

i

!!
I

1
l

1i
i

f
~

a collective. This posture constitutes one of the imperative requirements for any
person or movement worthy of struggling for peace if the Greek­Cypriots genuinely
aim at the reunification of the island, they ought to strive to reconnect with the
Turkish­Cypriot community through a renewed relationship of peace and tolerance.
In other words, the peace­maker must cross the "green line" first within himself, if
he desires to cross it geographically, let alone if he hopes for its dissolution
altogether. Here is precisely where the vanity of nationalism hinges, in that while it
demands a political solution, it does not seek peace, and while it feeds hatred, it
wants reunification. A position doomed to failure, since it inevitably discloses an
indiscriminate and provocative insincerity, the result of which can only be the
further reinforcement of tension and conflict. Peace requires a spirit capable of
cultivating psycho­human living­space in relation to "the other". It entails a struggle
for the capacity to include "the other" as an element in one's own psyche, in one's
language, in one's attitude. It requires that one gives the "other" a place in one's
existential space and experience, in contrast to the absolutism of nationalism,
which, on all levels, excludes and targets "the other" and "the different", Particularly
in light of the globalization process of the pending 21st century, this issue is of
crucial significance. For under the new conditions which are emerging
internationally, the continuity of different societies and cultures, not excluding
Greek and Turkish, will increasingly depend. not so much on the capacity for
survival from within, but on the potential for symbiosis with the other.
Finally, it is only through the spirit of peace that the Greek­Cypriots may offer the
Turkish­Cypriots an authentic way out from their guilt, which unconsciously and
often consciously haunts them, as well as from their fears and insecurities, which
condition them into their introverted defensiveness. But also on the political plane, it
is solely in and through the same mode of peace that the Greek­Cypriots may offer
the Turkish­Cypriots, not only formally and diplomatically, but also realistically, the
historical possibility of disengaging themselves from their radical dependency on an
illegal state and on the military might of Turkey. Beyond this, the development of a
public mentality of peace strips naked all those who conceal ulterior motives. and
dissolves every pretext which third parties may exploit to the detriment of Cyprus.
And the repercussions of this renewing dialectical relationship which emerges from
the deliberations of peace, will no doubt be enormous in benefits for the TurkishCypriot and the Greek­Cypriot communities alike. This is so, because only in the
all­embracing spirit of peace can the adversarial relationships, the tuthoritarian
personality and conflict­habituated culture commence entering the·· process of
essential transformation, We are referring to a process similar to what~s
begun,
but certainly has not been completed, in the Arab­Israeli peace process, and that
peace
between blacks and whites in South Africa. Moreover, it is this al-embr~cing
mentality which starts bridging the two contradictory perceptions of history and the
two subjective experiences of what constitutes justice. which .confusingly reign in
protracted conflictual relationships. Even more essential, is that in this manner, only
the spirit of peace is capable of dissociating the human p~in
of the past and
~

90

................ _,-_._,-----

,,­'

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

legitimafe human ne,eds from their exploitation by nationalism with its related
extremism and aggressiveness.
A fundamental issue for reflection for all those who are engaged in the struggle
to transcend the chasm created by conflict, hatred, violence and suspicion,
concerns the link between peace and justice. The most common, that without the
realisation of justice there can be no peace. According to this view, the principle
condition for achieving peace is the reparation of the evil that has been done, the
restoration of the conditions of life as they were. This approach however is always
insufficient. In and of itself it never arrives at peace. Outside of the sphere of
influence of the wi" for peace, justice remains at a lever of partial and deficient
restoration, but at all times stays far from fulfilment as a condition for peace.
Concerning the Cyprus problem, the rendering of justice, even to the greatest
possible extent, leaves enormous gaps. For instance, the Cypriot refugee may
repossess his home, and the lost properties may be compensated for. But the
original way of life, and the dreams associated with it, that have been lost with the
passage of time can never be returned, no matter what form of justice is pursued.
The fate of many missing persons, from both communities, may be verified, but the
numerous innocent people who lost their lives, from both communities, will always
remain in the memory of pain. How can one render justice to a family that has lost
not only its livelihood, but also its loved ones? Or to a mother who has lost her
child, whether Greek­Cypriot or Turkish­Cypriot? How does one offer justice to a
woman that lost her husband? With money? With symbols? With marble statues?
Nothing in this mutable world can substitute the loss in all fhese matters. And
precisely at this juncture, justice is mute! Here, both as a possibility and as the
avenue to peace, justice is always insufficient. Though necessary within the limits
of practical capabilities, it is nevertheless always inadequate in arriving at peace by
its own intrinsic means. For, following every historical episode of conflict and
violence between ad,versaries, there results a residue of injustice, that justice, in
and of itself, can never redeem. It is the wound which leaves it mark, as it were, no
matter how well it heals.
One of the key reasons for this insufficiency derives from the fact that protracted
conflictual relationships between rival groups, especially as they pass through
incidents of violence, polarise and break up justice. They fragment al10 dislocate it.
Violence always creates a mounting accumulation of irreparable ~njustice,
no
matter how necessary the use of violence may appear in the light qf momentary
historical circumstances. And herein lies the illusion of war as an optioh.
In protracted conflict with episodes of violence, justice is never entirely with one
or the other side. What normally occurs is that in its meaning, justice is interpreted
from within the uniqueness of the pain of each side. In Cyprus too. the sense of
justice for each community is directly intertwined with. and thus exclusively defined
by each one's own traumatic experiences. And it is precisely due to this'reason that
in any relationship of hostility and conflict justice becomes thwoughly subjectivized.

91

CONFLICT. ALIENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MILITARISm CYPRUS

In other words, the pain and anguish which results from the conflict leads each
person and each side to a monopolistic perception of justice, by claiming justice
solely in reference to their own experience of loss and suffering. And the greater
the suffering the greater the subjectivization of justice. which inevitably results in
diametrically opposed positions on what is fair and acceptable. Put simply, the logic
of this dynamic functions as follows: "I am hurting and I am suffering. Since I am
hurting and suffering, it means that I have been treated wrongly. And since I have
been treated wrongly, justice is on my side. And since justice is on my side, then
wrongdoing and therefore injustice lies with "the other", with the side of the enemy!"
It is in this manner that any history of hateful rivalry between people leads precisely
to opposing and contradictory perceptions of justice. Here is revealed yet another
aspect of alienation in the relationship of conflict, in that justice assumes an entirely
subjective form and meaning. A fact which both enhances and in turn becomes
enhanced by non­communication, suspicion and anger, generating frustration.
Most difficult, but also most necessary for peace in Cyprus, is the
acknowledgement that in the long history of conflict between the two communities,
from the 1950s to 1974 and thereafter. the culprit and the victim alternate. both in
the overatl pattern of events emerging from the different historical periods, and in
the very cycles of the events themselves within each historical period. The tapestry
of the history of violence and of ritualised vengeance, on not only the guilty but also
on the innocent. is woven in turn and simultaneously by each of the communities
and their respective Hmotherlands". Thus understood. the quest for justice cannot
be pursued as a one­sided affair. nor can justice of itself rectify the evils committed.

~ ..

The suggestion thereby is ~hat
peace. as mentality and as will, leads and
transcends justice, while it simultaneously grounds it and completes it. The key to
the matter lies in the profound fact that peace opens up the possibilities of life.
vitality and creativity far beyond the benefits of retribution or of the defeat of the
"enemy". This priority of peace is imperative because only in the spirit of peace, as
a way of life and as an invaluable principle of life­optimisation can Greek­Cypriots
and Turkish­Cypriots alike generate the inner strength and rationale to shoulder the
residue of the pain and the anguish of the past, which justice alone is incapable of
rectifying. But even the restoration of any justice that is objectively possible and
viable, such as the justice that is normally sought by formal political diplomacy.
even this justice, can attain realisation solely in the spirit and process of peace and
reconciliation. In fact it is often the absence of even schemes of fair solutions that
appear from a rational point of view as most viable and practical. Conversely, it is
the spirit and will for peace that prevents the implementation point of vi~w
as most
viable and practical. Conversely. in the spirit and perspective of peac8­i even the
most difficult and delicate of resolution schemes may attain implementation and be
sustained to fruition.
All of the above hold true precisely because the mentality of and for peace
brings the two interpretations of history and the two perceptions of justice within a

t
t

,

92

,

r.

:~ ;c:'i.~-j\

,

.. "

~:'

i".' ':;".

..- .. ,­ ..

-'~

I

I
i

1

I

J

I
,.
~.

.

,

~

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

single, unified field of thought, in a manner which commences the bridging process.
Once this process sets in, the persuasive will for peace, manifested simultaneously
through individual and collective means of expression, could substantially
contribute in reducing suspicion and building confidence and trust. Be it initiated by
political decision, and a subsequent institutionalisation of the process, or by a
general socio­cultural momentum for change, it is only in and through this peacegenerating process, that Cypriot Greeks and Turks may become liberated from
their fear of each other. And it is only then that they may be rendered free from the
anxiety and nervousness by which each side holds stubbornly and desperately
onto its own weapons, be they military, legal, economic Of ideological and
psychological as in nationalistic militarism.
In the last analysis. when all the arguments have been given, when all the
pressures have been applied, when all the political schemes have been suggested.
when all is said and done. it all comes down to a fundamental inner decision, a
decision more of the heart than of the mind, where in the end one stakes
everything on either choosing the road of conflict or on choosing the road of peace.
Though rarely addressed explicitly. this kind of decision is of utmost gravity in both
a deeply personal and a general collective way, as it constitutes one of the central
conditions determining whether the future will be closing down in further animosity
or opening up in revitalising hope.
The Price for Peace
. The nationalist mind always incites us to take risks of extreme measure, of
giving everything in the engaging conflict with "the enemy"; OUf energy, our wealth.
our thoughts, our stamina, our will. And in times of violence or war, it invokes us to
offer, as a matter of sacred duty, our very lives, and even more so, the lives of our
children. But we ought to ask ourselves: If for rivalry and for war, with all their
ambiguous results and tragic side effects. we are to be ready, according to
nationalism, to give everything, for peace, what are we ready to offer? What price,
what boldness, what courage, what sacrifice is peace worth? It is said that in wars,
the Greeks have created epics. For peace is it capable to create epic history?
Heroes of war we have in great abundance. but are we capable of nurturing and
giving rise to heroes of peace? For the likely event of war we see numerous
preparations, investments, scenarios and exercises. For peace, what pr~-education
do we have, what investments, what preparation, what knowledge? The suffering
and anguish of war we generally seem to accept. But can we shoulder tile pain for
peace? As peace also has its price and its sacrifices. The dif~renc
lies in that
while the pain of war is a pain of despair and of inner void. the pain for peace is
one of profound existential meaning, it is a pain of rebirth, life­giving, akin to that of
a woman in labour. All these issues raise fundamental questions as to who we are
and what we have become as human beings through our sOCialisation into the
adversarial mentality of a conflict­habituated culture. They raise questions as to

!i
93

----

CONFLICT. AlIENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MIUTARISED CYPRUS

what we have become, not in our stated priorities, but our lived priorities and
values.
In the last analysis, irrespective of the particular form the political solution will
take to be mutually acceptable and genuinely viable. the reunification of Cyprus. in
effect, passes through peace­making and peace­building between the two
communities. One of the chief irrationalities of nationalism, which repeatedly drives
history to a cul-de-sac, is that it always tends to seek political solution to the conflict
without seeking peace and reconciliation. The politics of diplomacy for solving the
problem is validated and rendered credible only when it is framed by a spirit of
peace, expressed in word. in deed, in social life, in disposition. in culture. A
political solution cannot be elaborated exclusively through diplomatic cleverness.
nor through fiery nationalist speeches, nor through exhibitions and parades of
"victorious· armies. Any genuine solution that would coincide with peace has to be
processed through the means and the mind of peace.
The struggle for peace is one of striving for in­depth mutual understanding.
beyond and beneath the surface of sated political positions. It is a straining.
embracing effort to reconnect with one another through the mode of "relational
empathy· (Broome 1993, p. 103). It is a striving for mutual repentance and
forgiveness, as the sole means of effectively healing the wounds of the past. of
transcending those primitive instincts of reactionary militarism and vengefulness
which always lead to new tragedies. It concerns the necessity for inner catharsis
form the historical accumulation of numerous evils and sufferings (Fitzgiboons
1986. pp. 629­633; Montville 1993, pp. 117­121). It concerns the cultivation of a
peace­loving personality and of a peace­oriented culture. as both a precondition
and a finality, for the transformation of society from an order of conflict to an order
of peace.
There is much which separates Greek­Cypriots from Turkish­Cypriots. But what
we have in common is our tragedy, mutual pain, existential agony and the
perpetuating historical dead end. And here is also the starting point from which we
ought to initiate the struggle for peace, the humanisation of our relationship, in that
we are partners, bound together to a common history of pain and suffering. We
must therefore. orient this inevitable partnership to a new realm, that of peace,
which is the only one that leads to genuine justification, to existential emancipation
"
and the edification of authentic freedom.
of
Concluding, it ought to be noted that the restoration of peace simultaneously
of
entails, also, the restoration of the individual, or better of the conret~ps.
our very self. For the man who lives in animosity and hatred through a conflictual
relationship is also the man who lives a schism within his own soul. He lives a
dichotomous life, divided between that part of his self which is human, which pains,
which deSires. which longs for fulfilment, and that part of his self which feeds on
vengeance, fanaticism and aggression. In this perspective. the man who wages
war against the enemy, is also waging war against his very self! Thereby, peace
flO

I

l .

•

:

.......

¥

~

,

•

THE CYPRUS REVIEW

and restoration in our relationship with "the enemy", simultaneously means peace
and restoration with and within our own self. It means freedom from the cancerous
growths of antagonism, conflict, violence and animosity.
There exists an ancient saying which gives a vivid rendition of the human
condition in which evil ways and the predisposition for animosity is perpetuated
from generation to generation. It states: "The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and
the children's teeth are set on edge"! The antidote to this existential impasse is the
spiritual and cultural turn towards peace, as the authentic precondition of freedom.
Bibliography
Anderson, B. (1991). Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism. London and New York: Verso (1 st ed. 1983).
Attalides. M. (1979). Cyprus: Nationalism and International Politics. Edinburgh:
Q Press.
Broome, B. (1993). "Managing Differences in Conflict Resolution: The Role of
Relational EmpathY. In Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Integration and
Application. Manchester. Manchester University Press.
Burton. J. (ed.) (1990). Conflict: Human Needs Theory. New York: St. Martins
Press.
Denktash, R. R. (1982). The Cyprus Triangle. London: Allen and Unwin.
Ellul, J. (1973). The New Demons. New York: Seabury Press.
­ ­ (1965): Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes. New York: Random
House.
--(1969). Violence: Reflections from a Christian Perspective. New York: The
Seabury Press.
Fitzgibbons, R. P. (1986). "The Cognitive and Emotive Uses of Forgiveness in
the Treatment of Anger" Psychotherapy, 23. pp. 629­633.
­­Gellner, E. (1983). Nations and Nationalism. Oxford: Basil Blackwel1.
--(1964). Nationalism. In Thought and Change.
Hobsbawm, J. E. (1990). Nations and Nationalism Since 1870. Cambridge.
Kizilyurek. N. (1993). Hi Kypros peran tou ethnous. Nicosia: L G. Kasoulides and
Son ltd.
King, M.l. (1982). Strength to Love. Glasgow: Willima Collins.
f
Middle
Kitromilides, M. P. (1990). Greek IrredenUsm in Asia Minor and CYRrus;
·l
Eastern Studies, June.
,'"
~
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York:
MCGraW­Hili.
Meyrowitz, J. (1985). No Sense of Place: The Impact of Electronic Media on
Social Behaviour. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

95

.... '.:' ~

­.' : ' ..

.'

CONFLICT, AliENATION AND THE HOPE OF PEACE: THE STRUGGLE FOR PEACE IN MIUTARISED CYPRUS

Montville, J. V. (1993). The Healing Function in Political Conflict Resolution. In
Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
Nairn, T. (1979). "Cyprus and the Theory of Nationalism". Small States in the
Modem World. Nicosia: Zavallis Press.
Papadaki, Y. (1994). "The National Struggle Museums of a Divided City", Ethnic
and Racial Studies, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 400­419.
Sandole, D. J. D. (1993). "Paradigms, Theories and Metaphors in Conflict and
Conflict Resolution: Coherence or Confusion?" In Conflict Resolution Theory and
Practice: Integration and Application. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

if

96

