Generations of Peace:

Conflict Ending Strategies in Cyprus

Michael Shackelford

Political Science Directed Reading

Dr. Kuehls

May 6, 2004

INTRODUCTION

Since the end of the cold war, the international community has faced new
and different challenges to peace and security.  The world is not
threatened by large superpower wars, but by small ‘intractable’
conflicts.  In the era of globalization, states are no longer considered
the only actor in international politics, and they are certainly not the
only actor of violence.  In all parts of the world there are examples of
this new type of violent conflict.  Ethnic conflicts, territorial
disputes, political coups, are just a few examples of the new problems
that have to be addressed.  In this respect, peacekeeping and
peacemaking are the new challenges for the international system
(Richmond 1).  

The practice of peacekeeping and conflict management is not only new in
the world; it is fairly new in academic discourse and discussion. 
Besides raising questions of legitimacy or desirability, different
theories and strategies have been suggested and debated as how best to
conduct preventative diplomacy, conflict management and peacekeeping. 
One very interesting book on this issue is Making Order, Making Peace by
Oliver Richmond.  This book not only explains and neatly packages
different approaches to ending conflict; it also offers unique
criticisms of each approach in a hope to develop a new strategy for
peace.  After separating most conflict ending approaches into “three
generations,” Richmond concludes that all applications of ending
conflict may create and recreate a particular world order (9-11).  He
further suggests that this ‘world order,’ is the source of conflict,
and explains why any approach that does not address this is destined to
fail. All of these views create a “regime of truth,” where certain
assumptions are made about what constitutes peace and how to achieve it
(Richmond 186).

This paper will take a more in depth look at these generations of
conflict resolution by analyzing the very specific conflict that is
occurring in the Republic of Cyprus.  This paper will be presented in
much the same format that Richmond writes, where each generation is
explained, along with the arguments that support and justify them. 
After grasping the concept, it will be shown how each generation lacks
the complete ability to resolve or address conflict.  During the course
of this paper, some terms will be used interchangeably to denote
strategies for ending conflict.  Conflict management is very different
from conflict resolution, and that difference will be explained. 
However, for the sake of this paper, it is necessary to read most uses
of the term ‘conflict resolution’ to mean the desire to end
conflict.  

Cyprus is a unique point of departure because of its timeliness, and
because of its demonstration of all strategies to end conflict. Cyprus
is one place that seems to challenge the fragile conceptual unity of the
state system, which is the very system that Richmond indicts.  For 50
years there has been no solution, and it is this paper’s hope to
explain why. 

HISTORY

The Republic of Cyprus has suffered a long history of conflict and
violence.  Even before its independence in 1960, Cyprus was a site for
colonial domination and a “battleground between its two ethnic
populations—Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots” (Cyprus Conflict
1).   Many perspectives circle around this conflict, many of which
describe violence of genocidal proportions, breeding hatred from each
side (Gibbons 2).  Objectively, the history of conflict includes a
constitutional breakdown, where in 1963 intercommunal violence exploded,
leading to the first occupation of United Nations peacekeepers.  During
the next decade of international “order,” the Turkish Cypriots were
forced to flee from ethnic violence, and the Greek Cypriots had to deal
with a violent coup d’etat (Borowiec 1983: 14).  The threat of
“motherland force,” was finally realized in 1974, when Turkey
invaded the Republic of Cyprus (Cadena 6).  After almost ten years of
failed negotiations and ceasefires, the Turkish controlled part of the
island declared independence.  The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
still exists today, though is only recognized by Turkey (Cyprus Conflict
1).  Against the backdrop of communal violence, terrorism, and
intimidation, negotiations have continued to the present day. 

Until recently, the international community has neglected the Republic
of Cyprus.  On the surface, the cease-fire agreements and lack of armed
conflict made few concerned of actual conflict.  However, this
perspective could not have been further from the truth.  During the 25
years leading up to the current state, both sides had gone through arms
build-ups, terrorist attacks, territorial disputes, economic collapse,
and failed negotiations after failed negotiations (Barkey 2002: 3).   A
“green line of demarcation” divided the island causing ethnic
hatred, and nationalistic violence (Norton 2).  At one point, Turkey and
Greece were on the verge of an all out hot war, flying planes over each
other’s air space (Borowiec 2003: A2)  Multiple international actors
have hopelessly tried to influence both sides into an agreement, but
leadership changes and overall mistrust have prevented any solution.  

Only now that there is a risk of armed conflict is the international
community stepping up its efforts.  On May 2004, the Republic of Cyprus
will be entered into the European Union (Hugg 2001: 2).  Stephen Norton
explains what may happen if a settlement is not reached before EU
membership:

The Green Line separating the two communities would effectively become a
permanent, armed, demarcation line.  In this scenario, everyone would be
a loser.  The Turkish Army presence in Cyprus would be viewed as an
occupying force in EU territory.  Greek-Turkish relations would surely
suffer, and tensions over disputed in the Aegean could be expected to
escalate.  NATO cohesion would be diminished, and it could lead to a
military confrontation between two NATO members (3).

  

In the last year, both sides have made significant steps to reach a
settlement before the deadline of May 2004.  The border between the
Turkish and Greek side has been turned into a buffer zone, and many
travel freely from both sides.  Confidence building measures, which are
mutual trust agreements and limited coordinated military reductions,
have continued, and the arrangements made by the United Nations, NATO,
and the European Union have seemed to create an atmosphere for peace
(Borowiec 2003: 1).  In the coming months, this peace will be sought
after but few will ever interrogate the meaning of that peace.  A
settlement may stop the conflict described by Norton from happening, but
will it permanently resolve the conflict?  Few are asking that question,
and even fewer care to answer it.

FIRST GENERATION

Oliver Richmond’s first categorization of conflict strategies is one
of conflict management.  Labeled the ‘first generation’ approach to
conflict, this conflict involves a very limited and exclusive unit of
analysis (43).  Very similar to the realist position, the first
generation sees intractable conflict as somewhat beyond the scope of
analysis, maintaining that solutions should be found in the
“reconstitution of existing states” (Richmond 43).  Examples of this
could be seen in consent-based or coercive diplomatic or military
methods.  Territorial negotiations and “constitutional
arrangements,” sometimes creating new states are also examples of this
method (Richmond 51).  This conflict management approach has a limited
state-centric discourse, and is usually framed in terms of power
politics.  This perspective obviously excludes other actors, while
primarily reinforcing state interests.  

In this Westphalian system, “success is denied as spanning the
production of a negotiating culture, a cease-fire, or a settlement of a
short- or long-term nature and is dependent upon the qualities and
resources of the mediator” (Richmond 42).  A mediator is a neutral
party that tries to force or allow a settlement between the two parties.
 This “third party,” can be the United Nations, the United States,
or other international organizations.  The point is that the “third
party has the capacity to offer a reward or exert pressure on the
disputants to bring them to a settlement” (Richmond 54).  One can see
this proof with the example of the United States as a mediator.  The
United States has been a third party in many disputes and has been quite
successful because of its international clout and legitimacy.  At the
same time however, after a settlement is reached the United States
quietly leaves until the conflict resurfaces.  This resurfacing is
inevitable in the first generation approach, and is merely seen as an
example of anarchy in the world of states.  Peacekeeping then exists
only to prevent ‘open’ violence from occurring.

Henri Barkey’s description of Cyprus as being the, “predicable
crisis” may have been more illuminating than originally thought (1). 
In the international system of the first generation, conflicts between
ethnic communities are an eventuality, and the ability for states to
deal with these problems shows their inadequacies.  As explained above,
the sovereign state system tends to allocate rights on the basis of
nationality and self-supporting states.  Conflicts that fall outside the
framework of a realist, or that are even caused by the inadequacies of
the state centric system are “labeled intractable” (Richmond 9).  In
such cases the conflict goes on, unattended for many years, if not
decades.  In Cyprus, the conflict has been occurring for the last 50
years and, at times, got close to a full scale war (Barkey and Gordon
4).  Luckily, the May 2004 deadline has sparked a new interest, but only
because of the threat of force to the system, still the objective of the
system is to, “preserve the integrity of the states” (Richmond 72). 


One of the first methods proscribed for Cyprus under the first
generation approach is for the United States to act as a third party to
exert influence of the two parties.  The U.S. is considered to be best
equipped to entice the parties to the negotiating table and to act as an
“honest broker” (Schmitt 17).  Michael Schmitt has explained one
possible scenario for this in a phased approach:

The best approach to negotiations is a phased strategy which has been
discussed in official circles.  In the first phase the U.S. would
conduct separate bilateral talks with each of the parties.  Once
parameters and directions have been identifies and agreed upon, phase
two would begin: trilateral negotiations.  It would serve as a
“confidence builder” for the final stage of negotiations, which are
scheduled training meetings. (12)

It is interesting to note some of the language used in this suggestion. 
Not only is this strategy discussed in “official circles,” the talks
would only be conducted between official leaders and representatives. 
The concept of a “confidence builder” is also specific to a first
generation approach of getting states to agree with each other under the
current framework.  The first generation is also shown here with the
conception of negotiations being zero-sum.  Mediation is seen as
face-saving and the presence of states is justified.

This solution outlined by Schmitt is not the only first generation
approach; in fact, the majority of the literature on Cyprus favors first
generation approaches.  Some say that mutual reduction of force are
better than confidence building measure, while other suggest that,
“the parties should sign a protocol, promising not to undertake an
military exercises” (Unal 4).  Along with these variations of U.S.
action, the European Union is also a key player in the management of the
Cyprus conflict.  Under the EU solution, both Turkey and Cyprus would be
allowed into the union, in a hope that both states would cooperate. 
Patrick Hugg explains why the EU is best for acting:

The European Union appears best positioned to lead and leverage
constructive movement among vital parties.  As the preeminent symbol of
cross-border cooperation that evolved into revolutionary political
collaboration, the European Union is well-situated to lead the other
players to initial, impasse-breaking cooperation. (2000: 522)

Again, the justifications for this approach fall right into the logic of
the first generation.  An international organization acts as the liaison
for the international system of states, and creates a solution where
nation states work together preserving their sovereignty.  

In today’s atmosphere, all actors are participating in a solution for
Cyprus.  The U.S. has representatives abroad, and the EU is exerting
what influence they can.  Unfortunately, mediation states aren’t
trying different solutions, but instead pressuring each side to accept
the United Nations’ solution.  This solution has been named the Kofi
Annan Plan.  As Richmond explained, the primary aim of first-generation
approaches is normally to find a new constitutional arrangement in torn
states” (51).  In the case of Cyprus, the Annan plan is a new
constitutional arrangement that was created by the United Nations.  It
provides for a bi-communal state system where each side has a
proportional representation in the government in Cyprus.  The Annan plan
also provided provisions for an extended period concerning the return of
refugees and the maximum number of displaced persons who will be allowed
to return home.  This plan is now starting to be accepted, however there
are some concerns,

The prominence of first generation approaches shows the system
maintaining function that conflict management serves.  For the last 50
years, the same solutions have been sought after, and though cease-fires
have occurred, the conflict has never stopped.  

For the first generation, before a settlement can be reached, the
fighting between the parties must stop.  This is when the international
community usually gets involved.  “UN peacekeeping was often supposed
to provide the conditions of stability in which mediation and
negotiation could occur” (Richmond 47).  First generation approaches
see conflict management as the best that can be hoped for, because of
the competing state interests in an anarchical society of states.   They
don’t try to have the management address underlying concerns, or the
ability to resolve them.  These approached lead to controversial status
quos or solutions based on state security rather than justice.  With
respect to this generation, it is easy to see the self-replicating
nature of the system.  If conflicts are inevitable, and the only thing
the system can do is manage them, then no ultimate solution is created. 
From conflict to conflict, the preservation of sovereignty is sought
after and a positive conception of peace is forgotten.

	The United Nations Annan Plan is a good example of the deficiencies of
the first generation.  For almost 40 years the UN has been demanding a
solution to the Cyprus conflict without a legitimate agreement. 
However, the moment Turkey asked to join the European Union, the UN
created a plan to have the TRNC leave Cyprus, and instead create a
constitutional arrangement for both communities.

This new   HYPERLINK
"http://65.54.246.250/cgi-bin/linkrd?_lang=EN&lah=f45c9e12539c1d3af7560c
f87c1d41d4&lat=1083865223&hm___action=http%3a%2f%2fwww%2enationmaster%2e
com%2fencyclopedia%2fState" \t "_blank"  country  was to be a federation
of two   HYPERLINK
"http://65.54.246.250/cgi-bin/linkrd?_lang=EN&lah=cfa32e3ee9fd61fb7480ea
e53bf6dc5b&lat=1083865223&hm___action=http%3a%2f%2fwww%2enationmaster%2e
com%2fencyclopedia%2fState%2d%28non%2dsovereign%29" \t "_blank"  states 
– the   HYPERLINK
"http://65.54.246.250/cgi-bin/linkrd?_lang=EN&lah=1f424dc12a6839a1de732d
d6082a457d&lat=1083865223&hm___action=http%3a%2f%2fwww%2enationmaster%2e
com%2fencyclopedia%2fGreek%2dCypriot%2dState" \t "_blank"  Greek Cypriot
State  and the   HYPERLINK
"http://65.54.246.250/cgi-bin/linkrd?_lang=EN&lah=c59c71ff85ce9df3e89693
b598dd0731&lat=1083865223&hm___action=http%3a%2f%2fwww%2enationmaster%2e
com%2fencyclopedia%2fTurkish%2dCypriot%2dState" \t "_blank"  Turkish
Cypriot State  – joined together by a minimal federal government
apparatus. The plan included a federal constitution, a string of
constitutional and federal laws, and a proposal for a United Cyprus
Republic flag and national anthem, and it would have allowed both  
HYPERLINK
"http://65.54.246.250/cgi-bin/linkrd?_lang=EN&lah=60d8e6e5d74ed2fa2525b4
6a29db6bda&lat=1083865223&hm___action=http%3a%2f%2fwww%2enationmaster%2e
com%2fencyclopedia%2fGreece" \t "_blank"  Greece  and   HYPERLINK
"http://65.54.246.250/cgi-bin/linkrd?_lang=EN&lah=84cd03d8df4c4a0eccea75
c0c4ede24a&lat=1083865223&hm___action=http%3a%2f%2fwww%2enationmaster%2e
com%2fencyclopedia%2fTurkey" \t "_blank"  Turkey  to maintain a
permanent military presence on the island, albeit with large, phased
reductions in troop numbers (Nationbuilder).

This immediately framed the solution in terms of competing statehood
claims, and was never really accepted by the Turkish Cypriots because,
not being a member of the UN, they never had a say in the agreement. 
This generation also creates an assumption of statism.  Statism, or only
focusing on states as actors, “tends to strengthen singular
representations of Greek and Turkish Cypriots that may in fact be
contested” (Diez 2000: 4).  The effect of only focusing on states and
official solutions is that nongovernmental actors and individuals are
marginalized.  Intercommunal projects are rejected because they fall
outside the state system, thereby limiting the means of altering the
conflict coordinates, and “eventually limiting the imagination of
possible scenarios for settlement” (Deiz 2000: 4).  

The first generation also views peace and order in a strictly negative
context.  The international system views peace as negative peace or
absence of conflict, “what constituted peace is never seriously
engaged” (Richmond 107).  If peace is only the absence of armed
conflict and fighting, then entire manifestations of conflict are never
explored.  Human rights abuses, mistrust, hatred, social inequality are
all sources and examples of conflict that are not addressed by the
international community as conflict.  Alternatively, a positive
conception of peace would evaluate needs like social justice and human
security.

	Ultimately, first generation approaches assume the need for
“preserving the status quo” (Richmond 64).  Other factors are never
seriously engaged, and conflict becomes inevitable because that is the
way the first generation sees them.  Ethnic conflict is proof of the
deficiency of the statecentric system.  Instead of responding to these
problems with as many actors as possible, the first generation tries to
manage or decrease the conflict.  When this doesn’t work the conflict
is termed intractable, and the violence continues to occur.  Within a
generation that desires recreating itself, it is not hard to show that
the order of the international system will always reproduce itself.  It
was also not hard for people to respond to this exclusive approach.

SECOND GENERATION

	Richmond’s second generation discussed in the book directly refutes
the first generation and works from a conflict resolution perspective
instead of the conflict management:  

Conflict resolution can be viewed as the methodology through which
citizens are invited to deal with various aspects and dimensions of a
conflict, in which they are involved in a non-zero sum manner, but
without any grand intentions of influencing zero-sum debates that
continue at the official level (83). 

The solutions are created from the bottom-up approach.  Through
non-governmental organizations and individual centered methods, this
second generation model aims at the aspect of peacemaking versus
peacekeeping.  This method sees the importance of working with the
individual versus the top tier of the state or functions of the state
(Richmond 84). All too often the focus to settle disputes is on
government to government action, much like the first generation
approach.  What is lacking in these approaches is the individual’s
ability to be involved in the process.  Take for example the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process.  While diplomacy is occurring amongst
the leaders of both countries and the United States, the individuals are
the ones who are still tangled in violence and disengaged from any
involvement of the peace process.   The argument is that the problem of
the first generation rests in the structural deficiency of political
systems.  What becomes critical then is the ability of second generation
methods to be able to move from state security to human security
(Richmond 92).  Papadakis and Constantinou summarize this position by
stating that the, “issue of recognition is conventionally examined at
the level of state and government, but we suggest that looking at how
this issue works on and affects the individual is highly revealing of
how the recognition discourse operates in action, particularly in
divided societies”(82).

	What is conflict resolution and do some scholars argue is essential to
solving for conflicts globally?  Examples of conflict resolution
strategies are early warning systems, peace building, and
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) actions.  These examples are often
seen as a “radical methodology which can be utilized in a practical
and constructive way.” (Richmond 102).  This model when used, engages
in a struggle to reach out to a civil society and find a way to end the
conflict.  Because conflict resolution demands the need for a civil
society and an end to the conflict, NGO’s are most often involved, and
most times a successful actor.  Natalie Tocci, a research fellow at the
Centre for European Policy, claims that the first step in solving the
conflict in Cyprus is the allowance of NGO’s into the area, which
would construct a cooperative labor environment.  She explains:

An agreement between two authorities on the island is not expected in
the very near future.  Nonetheless, some action could be undertaken
immediately to gradually bridge divisions and misperceptions between
communities and thus erode the inter-communal conflict.  Such action
does not require an agreement between two negotiating parties, but could
be undertaken independently if the two sides allowed civil society
groups and NGO’s on the island to operate freely and the Republic of
Cyprus in particular opened its labor market.  Were these two
developments to take place, they could facilitate the erosion of the
inter-communal conflict and thereafter encourage an inter-elite
agreement (50).

	Civil society in Cyprus is clearly a challenge to all actors currently
involved from both generations.  A civil society designates “a space
between the family and the state in which new ideas can be developed,
experimented with, and refashioned to provide institutions and other
mechanisms to solve problems” (Tirman 2).  NGO’s have for many years
been working inside and outside of Cyprus to find a solution to the
Cypriot problem.  Civil society is a key component of conflict
resolution, and without it, conflict resolution cannot be maintained or
even reached.  

	It has been argued that the second generation approach is the only
mechanism which could bring the individual back into the realm of
conflict resolutions and some even argue that resolution and peace can
only be obtained if the consent of the individual citizen is achieved
(Richmond 99).  One way that the second generation would allow for the
individual to become active is through grassroots movements.  Grassroots
movements are an integral part of the whole process of conflict
resolution.  A movement allows for an individual to galvanize around a
cause, in this case it would be the need to find peace.  Grassroots
movements take a different approach to solving conflicts and find ways
to strengthen the needs of the individual versus the state.  Grassroots
movements help to become a mediator in the conflict management and
resolution process (Tirman 3).

	An additional distinction in second generation approaches is its
conception of peace.  For the second generation, conflict is in
structures, it is not always open violence.  Obviously the difference
comes with the interpretation of the word ‘peace.’  While first
generation approaches see peace as the status quo management, the second
generation sees it as a “natural harmony,” of interests.  Second
generation interpretations of peace are based on universal needs.  When
these needs are not allocated correctly there is conflict (Richmond 91).
 Trust and personal security may be a universal need, just like identity
or economic status, or human rights; the point is all of these,
“derive from an ontological drive common to all” (Richmond 91). 
Because of the lack or contact and the failure to focus on economic
disparities and lack of opportunities, “the conflict has been
transferred in the realm of security, and thus reducing the scope for
conflict resolution” (Tocci 14).  That is one reason why the European
Union considered their solution desirable.  Cyprus in the EU would help
Cypriot’s economic condition and potentially help Turkey’s economy
too (Mier 34).  This incentive to fulfill one of the basic needs of
economic security is used as a carrot to get a settlement.

Though the second generation is a critique of the statecentric approach
of the first generation system, it still includes it and continues to
“frame, stimulate, and delineate, all discussions within the first
generation” (Richmond 103).  There are new opportunities for
individuals at all levels to communicate with each other in the context
of a nonstate actor framework, but that opportunity still occurs within
the constraints of the Westphalian system.  Ultimately, the second
generation only reforms the system, compared to the overt reproducing
that the first generation entails.

The second generation also relies on a universal normative framework. 
Similar to a human rights doctrine, the second generation is setting up
a doctrine for conflict resolution.  Assumptions are made about the need
for order, and about the way human needs are constructed.  Obviously,
such universal concepts, when deployed in the international sphere, can
risk hegemony.  The emotional and relationship ties that are sought
after soon get constructed around the nation, which then overrides all
of the dimensions of conflict (Mack 2).  This type of “bad
nationalism,” created underlying current of resentment and makes any
compromise seem as a surrender or national interest, both security and
identity.

Just as the second generation was a response to the first, academia has
responded to the second generation with a simple response.  The first
two generations both reduce the conflict to their dominant dynamics,
both are acultural and view it as something that can be managed. 
Because of their intense criticism of each other, both generations
undervalue significant aspects of resolution by privileging and
prioritizing the issues that need to be addressed.  No matter what level
of analysis, both of these approaches “reproduce the frameworks that
underpin the systems that are constituting and constituted by”
(Richmond 131).  This means that before conflict can be addressed, a
critical understanding of what is being reproduced is required.  For the
first generation, the unique ordering of the nation state system is the
outcome, and what is reproduced is a system that cannot adequately deal
with nonstate security issues (Richmond 117).  For the second
generation, the unique ordering of human rights and conflict solving
measure is the outcome, and what is reproduced is a system that neglects
the value that state action can have (Richmond 131).  Both of these
approaches rely on a universal assumption that conflict can be stopped
with calculated moves, the only difference is the type of ordering.  

THIRD GENERATION

The simple response to the problems of prioritizing is to combine the
two approaches.  This, Richmond argues, is the third generation.  This
pluralist world-society approach focuses more on human-needs and limited
statecentric solutions.  This approach contends that focusing on the
international outlets of sovereignty, or merely changing state’s
actions only replicate the very issue at the roots of the conflict. 
Human nature, poverty, and cultural differences are focused on, instead
of states (Richmond 141).  This may sound very similar to the second
generation; however, what is created is a complex and multilevel
approach.  The third generation performs the synchronizing of conflict
management, conflict resolution, and conflict transformation (Richmond
140).  For example, UN peacekeeping can provide foundations for
humanitarian, preventative, and peace-building.  Richmond explains the
example of Agenda for Peace, which was encapsulated within the UN
Charter (165).  This combination of all the principles and coordinated
approaches as a general commitment to a broader notion of peace and
security leads to a better conception of conflict.  Likewise the
solutions that come from this generation are more inclusive and far
reaching.  Post settlement environments, disarmament, repatriation for
refugees, are all examples of this approach.  Thus, the peace process
comes to, “envelop a spectrum of actors” (Richmond 148).

	In Cyprus, there is little or no coordination of these efforts.  As
explained above, most actors are focusing on the UN plan.  This however
does not mean that both approaches are not going on at the same time. 
On the one hand, there are those meetings initiated by international
actors.  On the other hand, there are a number of grassroots activities.
 As Thomas Diez explains, “Only a combination of both sorts of
intercommunal activities have the potential to contribute to
desecuritization and confidence-building” (38.)  Cypriots have also
voiced the necessary demands for inclusion in this framework.  Social
movements by themselves usually introduce far-reaching ideas that have a
tenuous or poorly understood support among the public.  As John Tirman
explains, “conflict resolution at any level must be cognizant of
political and social realities,” stating later that, “this is absent
in Cyprus” (2-3.)

Even though this third generation approach is a significant improvement
on the first two, Richmond explains some very important drawbacks.  What
runs through all approaches is a normative position that there must be
order, and therefore a method for creating that order and peace
(Richmond 178).  This is what leads to the questions on what basis
should these methods be defined?  Political, territorial, economic,
cultural, or humanitarian?  As explained above, the United Nations has
attempted to create a lot of radical goals and ideas calling for a
change of the system, however, before those ideas can be employed, a
framework is required.  They are then faced with developing a framework
for making peace, which falls back into the same official level actions.
 Richmond explains that:

The United Nations has become by far the most significant actor in the
post-Cold War era, partly because of its recognition of the multiple
political, social, economic, and humanitarian dynamics or “peace”
via the concept of human security, though of course it is still chained
to its constitutional framework, which makes it difficult for the
organization to overcome the interests inherent in its statecentric and
official construction (169). 

Approaches to ending conflict are always presented as doing good for the
international community. Vietnam, Iraq, even Cyprus are all examples. 
However, what they end up accomplishing is the maintenance and the
continuance of an international system and an order that has proven to
not be self-sustaining.  All of these approaches to ending conflict
eventually fall into methods of supporting an order of negative peace. 
The assumption that the application of all three generations may create
a positive peace hides the discontinuity of the international system.
“What has tended to occur since the end of the Cold War is that peace
operations have aimed at the reconstitution of states and their
frameworks” (Richmond 170).  The proof of this is that “ending
conflict has become less consensual and more interventionary in their
nature” (Richmond 163).  The current situation of Iraq is a good
example of a conflict ending strategy, now justified with human rights
violations, that was created by an intervention.

	Lastly, the third generation fails when it is implemented in the
system.  This pragmatic approach leads to watered-down ideals.  When
creating complex, radical strategies for peace, they are incrementally
applied in the short run to accommodate for the realities of the present
situation.  The problem is the long term goals and normative beliefs
never become the short term.  This “practical/normative trap is the
inevitable result of institutionalizing conflict management within a
positivist framework” (Richmond 183).  Making peace thus becomes a
selective practice, based on hegemony and on confused norms that
represent claims for a contested universality, which lacks the necessary
resources to make for long-term effectiveness.  Why Cyprus, and not the
Kurdish conflict? Why wait until the deadline?

THE POSSIBILTY TO PEACE

	In Richmond’s final analysis, he explains how the third generation
approach is to be preferred but that something must be done to address
its inadequacies.  If all three approaches ultimately create “regimes
of truth” that prevent peace, then an approach has to be created that
is not universal and exclusionary (Richmond 186).  The problem with any
approach is it lacks the legitimacy at the other levels of the
international system. The answer to this problem is a “sensitizing
approach” that includes all aspects of conflict resolution (Richmond
192-193).  This must be an anti-hegemonic and pluralistic.  The
protection of the local distinctiveness must be also part of this
system.  An example of this may be the Agenda for Peace program, just
changed so that that local is not subverted in the process.   This
possible fourth generation of conflict resolution is what is needed to
address the exclusionary and inadequate approaches of the prior three
generations.

	It would seem like notions of peacemaking, or conflict resolution would
fly in the face of these exclusionary tendencies, after all, resolving
conflict requires, “normative and emancipatory projects to overcome
the binaries that power discourses produce” (Richmond 126).  However,
even this approach is suspect because of its problematic imposition of
its expectation of “peace” and “order.”  Richmond then offers
the possibility of more critical approaches to making peace; “these
approaches may help sensitize the practices of ending conflict and or
peace building to the pitfalls of hegemonic or neoimperialist
discourse” (194). What is needed is a transformation of exclusionary
political communities so that respect for cultural differences can
replace totalizing projects.  This has important implications for
approaches to peace in that it shows that the “order” envisaged
needs to be rethought.  “Following on from the rethinking of the
objectives of making peace at a structural level, its normative basis
needs to be rethought in order for it to aid the development of
nonexclusionary political communities” (Richmond 199).  In other
words, approaches to making peace must not make the mistake of
contributing to a totalizing project as the first three generation
approaches do.

	This approach is also occurring in Cyprus and is being called for by
many scholars.  As explained above, one of the major problems in the
earlier generations is their conception of peace.  Thomas Diez offers
two very specific criticism of this conception of peace in relation to
Cyprus.  The first argument attacks the assumption that the communities
in Cyprus had a “paradise history” (Diez 2000: 8).  As explained
above, the second generation holds this assumption in its view of a
“natural harmony on interests’ that will always exist between
groups.  This view is prevalent in most conflict resolution history, and
states that the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots had a cooperative
and peaceful past.  Though this may be a more optimistic view, and a
view that the second generation has, it is historically false.  Diez
explains that this view means that the, “peaceful coexistence is
relegated to the past in somewhat quasi-imperial nostalgia” (2000: 9).
 This too is system maintaining because it creates an image that under
the old state structure, Cyprus was peaceful.  In also whitewashes over
the fact that conflict may not be resolvable.  This assumption is needed
to justify the previous generations, and is something that must be
changed to create a sensitizing fourth generation.

	The second argument is a direct criticism of the language used by many
scholars writing on Cyprus.  In most literature, the conflict
surrounding Cyprus is often called the “Cyprus question” or
“Cyprus problem” (Diez 2002: 5).  Both of these labels downscale the
problems on the island, and as Diez further states that these labels
create, “the illusion that this could be solved by rational
‘problem-solvers’ from the outside” (2002: 5).  This also buys
into the concept of peace being the absence of war.  To say that the
situation in Cyprus is only a ‘question,’ negates the fact that
conflict is occurring, and has occurred for the last 25 years.  

	Perhaps the best conception of what a sensitizing fourth generation
approach to conflict would look like in relation to Cyprus is presented
by Papadakis and Constantinou, in their article entitled “The Cypriot
State(s) in Situ.”  Through the lens of recognition based politics,
they make the argument that what is going on in Cyprus is a privileging
of nation state status.  Both sides are forced into conceptions of
statehood, and both internal and external pressure is suggesting that
the only possible solution is that of statehood (Papadakis and
Constantinou 84).  For example, the Greek Cypriot government is the
state recognized in international law, not the Turkish Cypriot side
(Diez 2000: 6).  This creates roadblocks to a settlement because the
TRNC is excluded, and both sides feel threatened by unfair recognition.
For example, international law mandates that they don’t recognize.
This neglects some of the necessary alternatives that exist to ease
tensions.  This “state recognition,” that is often described as
inevitable, is a perfect example of first generation approaches that
only privileges the statecentric system and state level solutions.  As
Richmond argues repeatedly, the fourth generation must include an
anti-hegemonic and anti-state discourse that allows for many cultural
perspectives and local values (201).  Papadakis and Constantinou explain
this conception of the fourth generation with their description of the
Ledra Palace:

The Ledra Palace inside the Buffer Zone in Nicosia is the primary site
where intercommunal meetings have taken place.  Cross-ethnic contact has
taken many forms.  First, meetings of official negotiators and political
party leaders have taken place focusing on ‘high’ politics. 
Secondly, meetings of town planners of Nicosia have occurred dealing
with local issues…Thirdly, trade union leaders have met…Fourthly,
numerous meetings were organized for lawyers, educators, women, youth,
and others.  The citizens’ initiative at the Ledra Palace created a
large interlinked body of various groups from both sides that started to
meet regularly (85).

This celebration of the Ledra Palace is the exact approach that must be
taken.  Not only does it represent a citizen initiative developed from
the bottom-up.  It also shows that state policies and officials should
not be entirely excluded, but suggests that state recognition should be
put into perspective, challenging its monopolization of international
cognition and political discourse.  It also opens up debate about other
forms and cultures of recognition.  It is the very multiplicity desired,
under a complex system of conflict resolution, which is neither
hegemonic nor universal.  The issues discussed there are more than just
state security, or human security, but a wide range of positive peace
solutions that benefit an entire community.  This is one of the few
examples of this approach in Cyprus, and there is still a lot to be done
before a solution is reached.  However, it is demonstrations like this
that have paved the way from the improvement that has taken place in
Cyprus in the last two years.  The green line has been opened, and talks
are resuming.  Since January 2004, over two million Cypriots have
crossed the divided line, returning home, and settling for peace (Cyprus
Conflict 2).  This radical and positive change would not have been
possible under the exclusive and system maintaining approaches of the
past.

CONCLUSION

This paper has explored the many different strategies to ending
conflict, all of which have specific implications for Cyprus.  After
explaining the history behind the Cyprus conflict, three generations of
conflict ending approached were outlined and applied to the Cyprus
conflict.  Besides offering a background and criticism on these
approaches, this paper has hopefully offered some new perspectives on
conflict.  By applying specific examples and approaches to ending
conflict in Cyprus, this paper has accomplished finding possible fourth
generation alternatives that were not illuminated in the original text
by Oliver Richmond.  The conflict that is occurring in Cyprus is a
unique one, and the interplay of all the generations of conflict
approaches may be what is required to create peace.  However, keeping in
mind the recreating tendencies of the system, it would be interesting to
see what Cyprus was like in another 50 years.  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Barkey, Henri J. and Phillip Gordon.  “Cyprus: The Predictable
Crisis.”  The National Interest Winter 2002.

Barkey, Henri.  “Avoiding a Cyprus Crisis.”  Brookings Policy Brief
102 (2002).

Barkey, Henri.  “Cyprus: Between Ankara and a Hard Place,”
Summer/Fall 2003.  Vol. 10, issue 1.

Borowiec, Andrew.  “Aegean Sea Incident.”  Washington Times 5 June
2003.

Borowiec, Andrew.  The Mediterranean Feud.  New York: Praeger Publisher
1983.

Cadena, Lucas.  “Greek-Turkish Tensions.”  Journal of Foreign
Affairs Winter 1998.

Cameron, Fraser.  “The European Union and Conflict Prevention.” 
Special Libraries Association Annual Conference 13 June 2000.    
HYPERLINK http://www.eurunion.org/legislat/Defense?FCSSpeechConfPrev.htm
 www.eurunion.org/legislat/Defense?FCSSpeechConfPrev.htm 

Cockburn, Cynthia.  “Ethnic Partition: A Gender Analysis Based on
Cypriot Women’s Perspectives.”  Womanovres May 2003.

Diez, Thomas.  “Last Exit to Paradise?”  Copenhagen Peace Research
Institute June 2000.

Diez, Thomas.  The European Union and the Cyprus Conflict.  Manchester
University Press: 2002.

Ertug, Osman.  “U.N. Plan in Cyprus.”  Washington Times 28 October
2003.

Gvosdev, Nikolas K.  “Key Isle: Cyprus, Iraq, and the War on
Terrorism.”  Washington National Review 14 January 2003.

Hawkins, Robert B. and Kate Semerad.  “Conflict Prevention and U.S.
Foreign Assistance.” ICS Press 2002.

Hugg, Patrick R.  “Cyprus in Europe.”  Vanderbilt Journal of
Transnational Law 1239.34 (2001).

Hugg, Patrick R.  “The Republic of Turkey in Europe.”  Fordham
International Law Journal 606.23 (2000).  

Keefer, Scott.  “Solving the Greek Turkish Boundary Dispute.” 
Cardozo Journal of International and Comparative Law 55.11 (2003).

Lisaniler, Fatmaand Leopold Rodriguez.  “The Social and Economic
Impact of European Union Membership.”  The European Union and the
Cyprus Conflict.  Manchester University Press: 2002.

Mack, John.  “Psychohistory of Cyprus.”    HYPERLINK
http://www.cyprus-conflict.net/mack.htm 
http://www.cyprus-conflict.net/mack.htm 

Meier, Benjamin.  “Reunification of Cyprus: The Possibility of
Peace.”  Cornell International Law Journal  455.34 (2001).

Moss, Kenneth B.  “Untying the Aegean Knot: Options for Washington.”
 Standpoint 6.6 (2001).

Nationmaster.com, “Encyclopedia.”  2004.

Norton, Stephen R.  “U.S. Interests and Priorities in the Eastern
Mediterranean.”  Inside Track 6.4 June 2001.

Papadakis, Yiannis and Costas Constantinou.  “The Cypriot State(s) in
Situ.”  The European Union and the Cyprus Conflict.  Manchester
University Press: 2002.

Richmond, Oliver P.  Maintaining Order, Making Peace.  New York:
Palgrave, 2002.

Schmitt, Michael N.  “Aegean Angst: A Historical and Legal
Analysis.”  Roger William University Law Review 15.2 (1996).

Sitilides, John and Paul Glastris.  “Cyprus and the Clash of
Civilizations.”  Washington Post.  30 August 2002.

Tirman, John.  “Working Towards a Just Peace.”  The Cyprus Conflict 
December 2000.

Tocci, Nathalie.  “The Cyprus Question: Community Identities and Elite
Interests within a Wider European Framework.”  A Centre for European
Policy Document 154 (2000).

Unal, Hasan.  “Turkey and Greece: Time to Move On.”  Private View
Winter 1997.

Wilkinson, James M.  “Moving Beyond Conflict Prevention to
Reconciliation: Tackling Greek-Turksih Hostility.”  Carnegie Commision
June 1999.

 PAGE   

 PAGE   1 

	 Shackelford

