Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung

SAFRAN

Paper 07

PEACE, CONFLICT,
AND IDENTITY
Social Anthropological
Explorations on the
Continuities and Ruptures
between Conflict,
Post-Conflict, and Peace

Austrian Study Center for Peace and Conflict Resolution (ASPR)
Österreichisches Studienzentrum für Frieden und Konfliktlösung (ÖSFK)
Michael Lidauer and Thomas Roithner (eds.)

SAFRAN 07
Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung,
Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung

Austrian Study Center for Peace and Conflict Resolution
Michael Lidauer and Thomas Roithner (eds.)

Peace, Conflict, and Identity
Social Anthropological Explorations on the
Continuities and Ruptures between Conflict,
Post-Conflict, and Peace

3

SAFRAN
Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige
Entwicklung
This publication series of the Austrian Study Center for Peace and Conflict
Resolution (ASPR) gives young scientists the possibility to publish their research on
international relations, peace and conflict, disarmament, and sustainable
development. The SAFRAN series is open for other publications as well.
The contributions must not necessarily correspond with the opinion of the editors.

Redaktion:
Österreichisches Studienzentrum für Frieden und Konfliktlösung
Außenstelle Wien, Thomas Roithner
Wiedner Gürtel 10, A – 1040 Wien
Tel. 0043 – (0)1 – 79 69 959, Fax 0043 – (0)1 – 79 65 711
e-mail: roithner@aspr.ac.at

© 2010, ASPR / ÖSFK Burg Schlaining
Rochusplatz 1, A – 7461 Stadtschlaining
Tel. 0043 (0)33 55 – 2498, Fax 0043 (0)33 55 – 2662
e-mail: aspr@aspr.ac.at, Web: http://www.aspr.ac.at
© Coverlayout: Doris Engelmeier
Layout: Michael Lidauer
ISBN 978-3-900630-27-0
ASPR / Lidauer Michael / Roithner Thomas (eds.): Peace, Conflict, and Identity.
Social Anthropological Explorations on the Continuities and Ruptures between
Conflict, Post-conflict, and Peace. SAFRAN. Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für
Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung, ISBN 978-3-900630-27-0,
Paper No 07, Wien/Stadtschlaining, March 2010.
While copyright in this publication as a whole is vested in the editors, copyright in
individual chapters belongs to their respective authors. No chapter may be
reproduced wholly or in part without the permission in writing of both author and
editors.

Key words: Anthropology, Peace, Conflict, Identity, El Salvador, Sudan, Cyprus
Supported by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and Research

4

Contents

Introduction

7

Acknowledgements

9

Ainhoa Montoya:
When Does War Begin and the Transition to Peace End?
The Problems with Delineating War and Peace in El Salvador

11

Regine Penitsch:
Politics of Identity and Local Conflict in Darfur

25

Barbara Karatsioli:
Escalating for Peace in Cyprus:
Roads to Peace through Scales of Conflict

39

Index of Authors

50

5

6

Introduction
by Michael Lidauer
Peace and conflict have long been among the research foci of Social
Anthropologists. During the last decade, this topical area has come to influence the
discussions, research arenas, and fields of engagement of Social Anthropologists
even more explicitly. Not the end of history, but changes in the world order since the
break down of the Soviet Union, (re)emerging frozen conflicts and identity politics,
new markets of violence, changing means of warfare and cooperation have led
anthropologists to return to well-known sites under unknown conditions, to link viable
theories to new social realities, and to explore other research dimensions than
before. Among the challenges anthropologists face is how to make sense of these
dimensions and how to best communicate them. A huge amount of writings on this
topic has already been produced.
Social Anthropologists’ reflections on peace and conflict also become visible in
curricula, conferences, and networks. The Swedish anthropologist Ronald Stade has
founded PACSA – “Peace and Conflict Studies in Anthropology” – at the EASA1
Conference in Bristol 2006. PACSA is a European network of social anthropologists
who are interested in studying peace and conflict by putting people in the forefront of
their analysis. Anthropologists organized in EASA felt that peace studies in Europe
are by and large dominated by political sciences and international relations, favouring
an institutional approach. Anthropologists are keen to emphasize the agency of
people who are confronted by conflict and war with their theoretical approach,
fieldwork, and qualitative methodology. PACSA thus aims to contribute to make this
critical and reflexive approach to peace and conflict more visible through meetings
and publications.
After Bristol, PACSA first met at the Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology in
Halle (Saale) in Germany 2007. Several PACSA workshops took place at the EASA
Conference in Ljubljana 2008 and are organized at the EASA Conference in
Maynooth 2010. The 2nd Bi-Annual PACSA Meeting took place at the Austrian Study
Center for Peace and Conflict Resolution (ASPR) at Schlaining Castle. The 3rd BiAnnual PACSA Meeting is scheduled for autumn 2011.
Continuities and Ruptures between Conflict, Post-Conflict and Peace ...
The 2nd Bi-Annual PACSA Meeting (9 – 11 October 2009) was organised by Erella
Grassiani (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam), Alexander Horstmann (Max Planck Institute
for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity, Göttingen), Michael Lidauer (ASPR),
and Nerina Weiss (University of Oslo). The organisers invited scholars to address
one or several of the following questions: ‘Conflict’ and ‘peace’ are recurrent
concepts, constantly used within and outside academia. Peace is mostly defined in
its negative terms, and might as well be replaced by the rather ambiguous categories
of post- or pre-conflict. These terms have become more central within anthropological
studies, especially in connection with studies on trauma and reconciliation. The last
PACSA meeting had shown that even within the anthropology of peace and conflict,
these categories are not sufficiently defined and no common understanding of these
terms exists. The organizers therefore encouraged participants to (re)think and clarify
1

European Association of Social Anthropologists / www.easaonline.org

7

the categories of conflict, post-conflict and peace, as well as making the continuities
and ruptures between them visible.
The papers presented during the meeting have all reflected PACSA´s innovative
approach to peace and conflict studies. The organizers were proud to welcome
Carolyn Nordstrom (University of Notre Dame, USA) as prime key-note speaker. The
second key-note of the meeting was kindly delivered by Maria Six-Hohenbalken
(Institute for Social Anthropology, Austrian Academy of Sciences) who provided the
participants with the unique opportunity to receive an insight into the contested multicultural space of Burgenland, the very region where the conference took place, its
conflict history and marginalised present.
... in this SAFRAN
This SAFRAN edition brings together three selected papers that where held and
discussed at the 2nd Bi-Annual PACSA Meeting. All contributors are PhD candidates
or have recently finished their dissertation (see profiles in the end of the edition).
Their research results represent work in progress built on intensive and most recent
fieldwork in three culturally and geographically distinct conflict zones. These results
inspire anthropological thinking about the categories of peace, conflict, and identity.
All contributions relate to the main theme of the meeting at Schlaining Castle, that is,
continuities and ruptures between conflict, post-conflict, and peace. However, they
take different paths to explore these notions.
Ainhoa Montoya explores the continuities and ruptures between conflict, post-conflict
and peace in the context of civil war and everyday violence in El Salvador. She
shows that while most people agree to specific dates that serve as markers to
describe the beginning and the end of civil war in El Salvador, everyday violence had
not only preceded these dates, but has years later reached homicide numbers and
an atmosphere of fear and mistrust that exceed those of war times by far. Based on
her own most recent field work, Montoya criticises the description of the peace
process as a success and promotes a more gradual approach to the shaping of
history in this conflict-ridden country.
In chapter two, Regine Penitsch explores a “classic” social anthropological field in the
context of peace and conflict, which is the construction of identities and its use by
political agents and international stakeholders. By taking this approach Penitsch does
not only add another detailed and up-to-date analysis of the crisis in Sudan, but
invites to a more subtle and historically contextualised reading of conflict parties and
their identities in Darfur and beyond. Building upon the case of Jabal Marra, a
Darfurian highland, Penitsch shows that the simplifying and polarizing use of the
identity categories “Arabs” versus “Africans” does not constitute a root cause, but
rather an outcome of the conflict.
Last, but not least, Barbara Karatsioli dedicates her chapter to explorations of “the
political” and “the local” against the background of rapprochement and long-term UN
Peacekeeping presence in Cyprus. She bases her theoretical approach on the
comparative analysis of two villages, Potamia and Pyla, where Greek and Turkish
Cypriots lived together also after the partition of the island. Karatsioli shows how the
village communities took different ways to oppress or express violence – and to build
peace – in their respective regions, uses this comparison for a reflection on
peacebuilding, and derives at a proposal how to let “peace escalate”.
8

Acknowledgments
The 2nd Bi-Annual PACSA Meeting at the ASPR in Stadtschlaining would not have
been possible without the invaluable support of the Institute for Social Anthropology
(ISA) at the Austrian Academy of Sciences and the Austrian Federal Ministry of
Science and Research. Apart from the organisers and the contributors to this edition,
the following scholars have participated in the Meeting and contributed to the
discussions: Jens Adam, Jeroen Adam, Eyal Ben-Ari, Lidewyde Berckmoes,
Gebhard Fartacek, Erella Grassiani, Paul Grohma, Kathryn Hohman, Stefan Khittel,
Irene Kucera, Sonja Lenk, Sabine Mannitz, Veronique Schutz, Martin Slama,
Elizabeth Stones, Katharine Thurnheer, Christian Warta, and Patricia Zuckerhut.
Elizabeth Stones also deserves the editors’ gratitude for proof-reading parts of this
compilation.

9

10

boundaries
can
a
more
nuanced
understanding of El Salvador’s violence, past
and present, be achieved.

When Does War Begin and the
Transition to Peace End?
The Problems with Delineating
War and Peace in El Salvador1

Introduction
It is unarguable that a war took place in El
Salvador in the 1980s. However, when one
turns to the richness and complexity of
everyday life, the precise timespan over which
the war and the transition to peace occurred is
not as clear. Nor is it clear what constitutes
‘war’ and ‘peace’ in El Salvador. These
problematic aspects of the task of shaping
history were voiced by Salvadorans during my
fieldwork in Santiago Nonualco, a municipio of
the central La Paz Department2, in 2008 and
2009. In narrating their war experiences,
people from Santiago claimed that the history
of El Salvador as publicly disseminated
conceals their actual experiences of war
violence. The war account most familiar to
ordinary Salvadorans is the report by the
Commission on the Truth, which very clearly
states 1980 to be the beginning of war and
1992, when the Chapultepec Peace Accords
were signed, as its cessation; interestingly,
however, the report begins its narration of the
war with the events following the failure of the
15 October 1979 coup d’etat and stresses the
assassination of Archbishop Romero on 24
March 1980 as the herald of the war (United
Nations 1993: 3, 24-30). It is also generally
agreed that the signing of the Peace Accords
signalled the beginning of the political
transition from war to peace, a transition
praised by scholars and members of the
international community alike (see BoutrosGhali, cited in Moodie 2004: 237; López Pintor
1999; Montgomery 1995; Sriram 2004).
However, the high rates of violence in post-war
El Salvador and the often aggressive
manifestations of political division indicate that
reconciliation has not been fully achieved and
thus the transition not yet completed.

Ainhoa Montoya
Abstract
In 1992 the Salvadoran government and FMLN
guerrilla leaders signed the Chapultepec
Peace Accords, which put an end to El
Salvador’s twelve-year civil war. International
observers and members of the United Nations
who monitored the enactment of the Peace
Accords deemed the country’s democratisation
process a success. However, ongoing and
increasing political division and violence call
into question these positive assessments.
Likewise, an examination of the events that
occurred prior to the official beginning of the
war in 1980 challenges conventional war
history, evincing that pre-war violence and
conflicts in regions such as the La Paz
Department have been ignored. In this paper I
call into question the markers that were
established as the beginning and end of the
war and suggest that the grayness of the
concepts of ‘war’ and ‘peace’ could be better
apprehended by examining the linkages and
overlaps between them as well as the nature of
change as it manifests in everyday life. I argue
that the emphasis on rupture between the war
and the post-war era in El Salvador partly
results from a hegemonic depiction of history
and a reliance on conventional imageries of
war. The problems inherent in a concept like
transition and the consequent difficulty of
defining it are also discussed. The war account
that dominates public discourse, I argue, has
contributed to the obscuring of various
manifestations of both war and post-war
violence. Only by acknowledging the blurriness
of temporal boundaries and the political
motivations behind the drawing of these

The narration of history on the Salvadoran war
is scant and predominantly shaped by
triumphalist views of the war negotiations
(ibid.) and by the bulk of post-war testimonial
literature (see for instance Galeas and Ayala
2008; Panamá 2005; Peña 2009; Sánchez
Cerén 2008). Indeed, it is the history as written
by historians and other scholars that includes
more nuanced accounts of the Salvadoran war
(cf. Americas Watch 1991; Baloyra 1982;

1

I would like to thank the participants of the
Second bi-annual PACSA meeting held at the
Austrian Study Center for Peace and Conflict
Resolution in October 2009, as well as John
Gledhill, David Pretel and Aliaa Remtilla, for
their valuable comments on an earlier version
of
this
article.
Any
omissions
and
inconsistencies are the sole responsibility of
the author. I am especially grateful to the
members of the Father Cosme Spessotto
Committee for their friendship and generosity
in sharing their work with me.

2

A department is the main administrative unit
in El Salvador, with La Paz being one of the
fourteen departments into which El Salvador is
divided.

11

commonly held to delineate the beginning and
end of the war in El Salvador will serve to
support my argument.

Byrne 1996; Dunkerley 1982; Montgomery
1982). Interestingly enough, attempts by
Salvadorans to question the results of the postwar history-building process reveal that public
discourse is dominated by a war narrative and
war-related rhetoric that rigidly define the war
as a twelve-year conflict. In this paper I show
the artificiality of the account of the Salvadoran
conflict that embraces the triumphalism of the
negotiations and the political transition as
monitored by the United Nations. I also
highlight the contradictions that the war/peace
rhetoric and imageries put forward by both the
Salvadoran governments and members of the
international community engender on the
ground. Underlying such depictions, I argue,
there is a particular approach to historybuilding and a rigid imagery of war, both of
which have implications for defining violence
and for understanding how change occurs in a
case like El Salvador’s.

Before the 1980s
The history of the Las Ánimas Canton is one
that defies the hitherto accepted chronology of
the history of 20th century El Salvador. Las
Ánimas is a remote highland, covered by
tropical forest, in the Santiago Nonualco
municipio of the central La Paz Department. It
extends over the foothills of the dormant
Chichontepec Volcano, which defines the
border between the La Paz and San Vicente
departments. Studies on this area are scant
and limited to historical narratives, some with a
legend-like quality, based on the deed of Pipil
Indian Anastasio Aquino, who led a rebellion
against El Salvador’s rulers in 1832 (Barraza
Ibarra 2001; Domínguez Sosa 2007; López
Bernal 2008). Apart from a classic
anthropological
monograph
on
the
neighbouring municipio of San Pedro Nonualco
(Marroquín 1964), there have been no
thorough ethnographic studies on the
municipios of La Paz. Nor have there been any
war testimonies or studies of the war as it
transpired in this particular department. This is
partly because La Paz was commonly
considered to be outside the war zones; unlike
the Chalatenango or Morazán departments, La
Paz was not one of the main war
battlegrounds. This has led to the assumption,
even among Salvadorans, that the war barely
reached La Paz. It is assumed to have reached
only the departmental capital, Zacatecoluca,
which extends partly over the slopes of the
Chichontepec Volcano, where a large number
of civilians fled from the mountainous sectors
of the La Paz municipios and armed combat
between the guerrillas and the army was
frequent. My research in Santiago Nonualco
suggests, however, that war had been
experienced in the La Paz Department, albeit
in different ways and on a different timescale
than in other departments.

As a result of depictions that define El
Salvador’s political condition as one of either
war or peace, it has become commonplace to
refer to El Salvador as a ‘post-war’ or ‘postconflict’ society, the ‘post’ prefix vigorously
implying the surmounting of a conjuncture of
conflict and violence. Yet, as my ethnographic
research has shown, history-building efforts fail
to explain the past and present of a given
society if approached as a simple and logical
succession of discrete stages with clearly
defined boundaries. The difficulty in delineating
a historical stage in El Salvador is evidenced,
for instance, by the fact that, although the end
of the war is said to be 16 January 1992,
violence has continued ever since, with
increasing homicide statistics that surpass the
number of violent deaths in the latter stages of
the war (Ramos 2000). It follows from this
perspective that Salvadoran post-war violence
is approached as an inherently pathological
problem, an invitation in the eyes of some to
focus on the country’s ‘culture of violence’
(Alvarenga 2006; Moser and Winton 2002;
Santacruz Giralt and Concha-Eastman 2001);
a focus that could serve as a dangerous
deterrent to exploring the country’s historical
roots of violence and the political and
economic underpinnings of this violence. In
this respect, I follow in the footsteps of
Richards (2005) and Bourgois (2004), who
have theorised the war-peace continuum and
have accordingly explored violence as a
manifestation of ongoing political conflicts,
rather than restricting this endeavour
exclusively to war or, alternatively, assuming
that violence within peacetime is symptomatic
of a ‘culture of violence’. Depictions of the
blurriness of the temporal boundaries

A mourning event organised on 25 July 2009
by residents of various municipios of the La
Paz Department who comprise the Father
Cosme Spessotto Committee provided an
opportunity for many inhabitants of Las Ánimas
to break their silence on how the war had
affected them and to speak out about their
experiences. The Committee consists of La
Paz residents who define themselves as
victims of the war in the 1980s, either because
they themselves suffered violence or because
they lost relatives in violent acts. Their main
goal is to write the hitherto unwritten history of

12

the war in the La Paz Department, so that
acknowledgement of human rights violations in
that area during the war can bring about the
attainment of “truth, justice, and compensation”
and, ultimately, a veritable reconciliation. The
event was organised with the aim of
remembering and honouring the war victims of
Santiago Nonualco and was the first of this
kind in this municipio. The commemoration
ceremony was held in the Las Ánimas Canton,
generally accepted to have been the sector of
Santiago where the local population suffered
the most army and police harassment,
persecution and violence during the 1970s and
early 1980s. This was a significant and
emotional event for Las Ánimas residents,
given that their experience of war violence had
hitherto been pervaded by silence and denial.
The members of the Father Cosme Spessotto
Committee chose to conduct the ceremony on
the site where a church bombed during the war
used to stand and where four graves,
containing the remains of five local residents
assassinated during the war by the local police
forces, are located. It is an abandoned plot of
land covered with bushes and fairly tall weeds.
The plot lies beside the dusty main path
crossing Las Ánimas, from which the green
Chichontepec Volcano, located on the border
of the San Vicente Department, can be seen.
The four graves lie on the side of the plot
bordering the path. Their neglected state,
exacerbated by the cattle that regularly tread
on them despite complaints by relatives of the
deceased, is evocative of the oblivion to which
the subject of war has been consigned. The
commemoration ceremony marked the first
post-war opportunity for many inhabitants of
the Las Ánimas Canton to share their war
experiences publicly, both in the organisational
meetings that preceded the commemoration
and on the day of the commemoration itself.

past the entrance of the Las Ánimas school, he
encountered a military vehicle. He and his
horse were shot and left dead on the path. This
was not an isolated incident or a result of the
war that had just officially begun; Gaudencio
had suffered persecution and a two-year
imprisonment during the 1970s. His wife Rosa
suspects that he had been participating in a
local agricultural cooperative and had thus
supported political activity in the area, although
she cannot confirm this given that the men of
the area who participated in politics during this
time did not talk to their relatives about it. His
body was found by a local resident who buried
it in the plot where it now lies. In the same
year, in 1980, a daughter of his was abducted,
as were his two sons in 1981 and 1983. In
1980 Rosa and her five remaining daughters
had to flee the area. Throughout the 1980s
they continually resettled in different parts of
the country due to ongoing persecution. One of
the daughters had to go into exile and now
lives in the United States. In 2004 Rosa
resettled in Las Ánimas on her own.
According to various Las Ánimas residents, the
bodies buried alongside Gaudencio were those
of his relatives: Juan de la Cruz Galán, killed in
October 1980; Rosario Galán Hueso and
Efraín Grande, killed on the same day and
buried together in the same grave, also in
October 1980; and, Andrés Galán, killed in
January 1981. As close relatives of these other
victims have not yet been found, the details of
their death are unknown and the dates
unconfirmed. The members of Gaudencio
Galán’s family who survived did so because
they fled the area. The graves of other
residents killed before the war are spread
throughout the Las Ánimas Canton, typically
with no visible markers so that their location is
known only by the elders. Between the late
1970s and the early 1980s, more than one
hundred people were killed in Las Ánimas
alone. Committee members along with
residents of Las Ánimas have been able to
document the assassination of 124 people and
the abduction of 8 people in the early 1980s.
More Las Ánimas inhabitants were killed in
other sectors of Santiago after fleeing their
homes. As violence escalated, most of the
population abandoned their property and
belongings in Las Ánimas just as Gaudencio’s
family did. They either took refuge in the
houses of relatives who lived in the
neighbouring cantons such as San Sebastián
Abajo and San Sebastián Arriba or in the
centre of Santiago, or they left the area and
looked for a place to live in the peripheral
municipios of San Salvador. By 1982 the Las
Ánimas Canton was empty, its inhabitants’

One of the stories that members of the Father
Cosme Spessotto Committee sought to
reconstruct – a story that would initiate the
narration of many others by various residents
of Las Ánimas – concerned the four people
buried in the plot where the event was to be
celebrated. Every inhabitant of the Las Ánimas
Canton can tell ‘the story of the four graves’
but only the elders, some of whom helped to
bury the bodies, and the relatives of those
buried there can relate the details. On 28 May
1980, as I was told by relatives and
neighbours, Gaudencio Galán Hueso left his
house and rode his horse along the path that
leads to Santiago to meet with the person who
would sell him the fertiliser he used for the crop
of corn he cultivated in a small plot he had
recently acquired. When Gaudencio was riding

13

memory’, on which a monument in honour of
Las Ánimas war victims would be erected. His
deafness notwithstanding, Andrés Crespín – a
70-year-old who lived in the Las Ánimas before
the war – enjoyed narrating how the political
activity and ensuing repression had begun in
Las Ánimas. In the mid-1960s, he spent a year
in San Salvador living in the same house as
Salvador Cayetano Carpio, then leader of the
Salvadoran Communist Party and founder, in
1970, of the Popular Liberation Forces (FPL),
an armed group that would subsequently
become part of the Farabundo Martí National
Liberation Front (FMLN) (Baloyra 1982: 160166; Byrne 1996: 35-36). Conversations with
Cayetano led Andrés to read classical Marxist
texts and engage in further discussions. A year
later, when Andrés returned to Las Ánimas
after finishing his job in San Salvador, he
disseminated Marxist ideas amongst his
brothers and friends. Soon after, they formed
the first communist cell in Santiago, with the
support of the Salvadoran Communist Party
(PCS) delegate in the La Paz Department, thus
consolidating
political
discussion
and
organised activity in Las Ánimas, including the
dissemination of propaganda by the PCS at
night in the centre of Santiago.

belongings having been looted and its houses
and plots burnt by the local paramilitary groups
who had been very active in Northern
Santiago. Only in 1983, after guerrillas had
attacked the local paramilitary groups of the
neighbouring rural Santa Cruz Loma Canton,
did the violence diminish and the former
residents of Las Ánimas begin to return to their
land. Fear prevented most of them from
returning until after the signing of the Peace
Accords in 1992, and some never returned. As
many dwellings had been burnt, many former
residents could not afford to return and rebuild.
Indeed, most of the people who repopulated
Las Ánimas belonged to a younger generation,
the sons and daughters of those who had
suffered violence since the late 1970s and fled
the area in the early 1980s.
The population of the Las Ánimas Canton was
regarded as “communists” by Santiago
residents since the late 1960s3 and relabelled
as “guerrillas” or “collaborators” in the 1970s
when the first armed groups were founded in
El Salvador. As there are no records of what
the war was like in that area, and in fact the
whole department was considered to have
been outside the war zone, meaningful
information can only be obtained from the
generation that fled Las Ánimas during the
1970s and early 1980s. Only a few of these
elderly people have returned to Las Ánimas,
while the majority are now dispersed
throughout the suburbs and neighbouring
municipios of San Salvador. They have lost
touch to the extent that they do not know
whether their friends and neighbours are dead
or alive. One member of a family famous for its
political involvement, who now lives in Apopa,
a municipio in the periphery of San Salvador,
was the source of substantial information on
the history of the war in Las Ánimas. He first
met members of the Father Cosme Spessotto
Committee members while seeking information
on the plot that had belonged to the
cooperative he had founded along with other
Las Ánimas residents in the late 1970s. Most
members of El Progreso Cooperative had been
assassinated, and he was interested in
recovering the plot to turn it into ‘a site of

In the 1970s cooperatives were founded in Las
Ánimas to collectivise agricultural work as well
as provide a façade for locals’ political
meetings and actions. Had they assembled in
a single house without a legitimate aim, their
actions would have been judged “seditious”
and they would have been vulnerable to arrest.
The cooperative meetings provided a perfect
disguise for their political aims, or so they
thought. As it turned out, peasants of the Las
Ánimas Canton did suffer frequent persecution,
arrest and assassination at the hands of the
National Police, the National Guard and the
local Civil Defenses4, to the extent that simply
residing in that area became associated with
“subversiveness” and “outlaw”. Although the
outbreak of the war has generally been
established as 1980 (see for instance Baloyra
1982: 102, 105; Byrne 1996: 73-74; Dunkerley
1982: 132, 162; Montgomery 1982: xi, 159;
United Nations 1993), with the offensive
launched by the FMLN guerrillas on 10
January 1981, narrations by locals from Las
Ánimas of violence in the 1970s problematise
that commonly held view and evidence the

3

The rhetoric of the communist threat in El
Salvador dates back to the 1932 peasant
rebellion led by members of the then recently
founded Salvadoran Communist Party (PCS);
it served General Maximiliano Martínez
Hernández in legitimising the excess of
repression during his regime (Alvarenga 2006:
281-283; Anderson 1971; Gould and LauriaSantiago 2008; López Bernal 2007; Parkman
1988: 26).

4

‘Civil Defences’ were paramilitary groups that
originated before the 1980s and patrolled
urban sectors in order to report to the National
Police and the National Guard anyone
suspected of taking part in “subversive”
organisations and meetings.

14

abandoned. This was not only the case in Las
Ánimas; repression enforced by terror was
practised in the 1970s in other rural areas of
the La Paz Department, such as the
Zacatecoluca
Cantons,
where
military
operations and massacres emptied entire
cantons6. These events indicate that the
violence Salvadorans experienced before 1980
was something more than just an uneasy
peace, even though war had not yet been
officially declared and an uprising at the
national level had not yet occurred.

need for nuances. Although historians
generally coincide on citing 1980 as the turning
point that indicates the beginning of the war,
they do not agree on a specific date. Dunkerley
locates the war’s outbreak in April 1980, yet
affirms the difficulty of determining a precise
date, while Baloyra suggests that the 15
October 1979 coup d’etat that served to
overthrow the General Romero government
marked the beginning of a transition from
reactionary despotism to democracy, the civil
war being part of that political transition.
Montgomery
has
also
indicated
the
significance of the failure of the government
junta that ruled the country after the 15
October 1979 coup and the blatant human
rights violations that occurred in fuelling a
revolution. Others (Americas Watch 1991: 9;
United Nations 1993), including left-wing
sectors of the Salvadoran population, point to
the assassination of Archbishop Romero as
the event that triggered the outbreak of the
war. Byrne, however, argues that 1980
provided the conditions for the outbreak of war
in 1981, with the “final offensive” launched by
the FMLN. The lack of agreement on a precise
date shows the arbitrariness of determining
“critical events”, that is, events after which new
modalities of action and new or redefined
categories are instituted (Das 1995: 5-6).

Scripts of Everyday Violence in Post-War El
Salvador
Negotiations
between
the
Salvadoran
government and the FMLN guerrillas,
instigated and closely supervised by members
of the United Nations, began in 1989 (United
Nations 1992; United Nations 1993: 13). A
rupture in the negotiations appeared inevitable
when discussion turned to polemic issues such
as the purge of the military and the dismantling
of police forces. Yet, after a round of meetings,
both sides finally came to an agreement
(United Nations 1992). A transition from war to
peace was certainly initiated with the signing of
the Peace Accords in 1992, which can be
considered a turning point in history due to the
pivotal changes that were introduced: the
abandonment of a sanctioned confrontation
between the guerrillas and the army, which
relied on the support of the country’s police
forces and the acquiescence of the
government; the dismantling of the police
forces that had existed during the war; and the
purge of high-ranking military officials. These
measures had a great impact and symbolic
meaning for the Salvadoran nation as a whole.
However, the Peace Accords and their
enactment have had a somewhat less dramatic
effect on Salvadorans’ everyday lives. For
instance, the residents of Santiago Nonualco
experienced the worst of the war from the late
1970s to 1983, by which point violence and
repression in Santiago had drastically
diminished. Indeed, according to anecdotal
accounts, Santiago residents believe their daily
lives have been more affected by the
dollarisation of the Salvadoran economy set in
motion in 2001 by the Francisco Flores
government than by the Peace Accords. In
light of this, I argue that the transformation

The Commemoration organised by the Father
Cosme Spessotto Committee stirred Las
Ánimas residents’ memories of unrest and fear
and brought to mind relatives abducted or
killed during the late 1970s and early 1980s.
This in turn underscored the oblivion to which
those memories have been relegated in a
history of the war that neglects events that
occurred in the central regions in favour of
more sensational instances of violence, such
as guerrilla exploits or massacres by the army.
Political activity and confrontations with local
police forces commenced in the late 1960s in
Las Ánimas, with an upsurge in violence and
unrest occurring in the late 1970s and early
1980s. Las Ánimas residents recall that FAL5
guerrillas used to hide in this canton, but there
is little detailed information about this, apart
from the recollections of certain elders. By
1983, the war had ended in Las Ánimas
because the whole canton had been
5

The Liberation Armed Forces (FAL) was a
guerrilla organisation which originated as the
armed group of the Salvadoran Communist
Party (PCS). The presence of the FAL
guerrillas in Las Ánimas is consistent with
testimonies revealing the prior existence of a
communist cell in Santiago Nonualco in the
late 1960s.

6

These military operations and massacres
have been documented by members of the
Father Cosme Spessotto Committee in a
hitherto unpublished manuscript that compiles
information and testimonies on them.

15

brought about by the Peace Accords has been
overstated.

the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front
(FMLN) and those of the Nationalist
Republican
Alliance
(ARENA),
these
representing the two opposing sides of the
war. The FMLN political party began as a
Marxist-Leninist guerrilla organisation in 1980
and became a political party after the signing
of the Peace Accords in 1992. ARENA, a
nationalist and conservative party that serves
the interests of the economic elite, was
founded in 1981 by Major Roberto
D’Aubuisson, the intellectual author of
Archbishop Romero’s death and the founder of
the death squads, according to a report by the
post-war Commission on the Truth for El
Salvador (United Nations 1993: 180, 185). In
Santiago, the tension between these two
parties is so intense that certain conservative
rural sectors in the north of the municipio
cannot be visited by FMLN members
identifiable by their red and white flag or red tshirts, whether during or outside electoral
campaigns. In September 2007, the local
FMLN leadership of Santiago contacted a
neighbour from the Northern San Antonio
Arriba Canton who was interested in founding
an FMLN Base Committee in this area. A few
months after taking steps in pursuit of this goal,
he was beaten up by two unidentified hooded
men. He spent a month recovering in hospital.

Not only have homicide rates persisted at high
levels in post-war El Salvador, but they have
also surpassed wartime rates (Ramos 2000).
There is no single day on which newspapers
do not report several homicides, although it
was only after the 2009 FMLN victory that
violence became a burning social issue
considered worthy of front-page news in the
most widely-read Salvadoran newspapers,
namely La Prensa Gráfica and El Diario de
Hoy. Even before the 2009 presidential
election, homicides were never missing from
the departmental section of the newspapers.
However, usually brief and lacking in detailed
information, the daily homicides tended to go
unnoticed
unless
accompanied
by
a
sensational headline stressing the number of
homicides in the past month or a massacre
that had occurred the previous day. With or
without confirmation or evidence, the news
reports often attribute the homicides to youth
gang violence. A stereotypical news article
about post-war violence speaks of several
youngsters, presumably gang members, shot
to death, presumably by members of the
opposing gang. Such violence has become an
everyday issue in post-war El Salvador, one
that covers the pages of newspapers, fills
conversations, is subject to all kinds of
rumours, and instils fears in Salvadorans to the
extent that it permeates many aspects of the
mundane.

There is a third political party in El Salvador
that further contributes to the tense and
aggressive situation of Santiago’s municipal
elections.
The
conservative
National
Conciliation Party (PCN), founded in 1961 and
the country’s official party until the coup d’etat
in 1979, has governed the Santiago council
since 2000. Today it is a minor political party
relative to ARENA and FMLN, but it continues
to govern in some municipalities, and its
support of ARENA in the National Assembly is
crucial in passing or blocking legislation. When
it comes to municipal elections, however,
alliances between ARENA and PCN do not
exist in Santiago, so tension, threats, and
violence
characterise
the
relationships
amongst members of all three major parties.
Other national political parties, such as the
Christian Democratic Party (PDC) and
Democratic Change (CD), are not as visible in
Santiago. The confrontations between party
loyalists or people working for political parties
range from verbal aggression and death
threats to gunshots and physical violence.
During the 2006 municipal and legislative
elections two ARENA members were run over
by a car and killed, allegedly by a PCN
member, while painting logos and plastering
posters in the central streets of Santiago at
night. The driver claimed not to have seen

The ubiquity and multiplicity of post-war
violence is graphically illustrated by a variety of
violent incidents that occurred in Santiago
Nonualco both before and during my fieldwork
in 2008 and 2009. This municipio does not
stand out as one of the most violent; nor does
the La Paz Department whithin which Santiago
is located. Yet all the different types of violence
that exist in El Salvador exist in this particular
municipio. Although 18 years have passed
since the end of the war, I observed during my
fieldwork that political violence is still present in
El Salvador, and that electoral processes tend
to exacerbate it7. Violence has become an
integral part of politics, to the extent that when
elections approach, relationships among
neighbours who support opposing political
parties turn tense and hostile. The greatest
division continues to be between members of
7

This is not only the case for the municipal,
legislative and presidential 2009 elections that
I directly observed during my fieldwork, but
also for the 2004 presidential elections (see
García Dueñas 2006).

16

in Los Angeles, where the gangs were initially
formed, they were joined in the 1980s by
young Salvadorans whose families were exiled
during the war (Cruz 2007: 14). Deportation of
those arrested due to gang criminal activity
spread their organisational model and violence
throughout Central America10 (Winton 2004).
Estimates indicate that there are between
75,000 and 250,000 active gang members in
Central America, 10,000 to 30,000 of them in
El Salvador (Hume 2007b). The large band of
error is due to the scant knowledge that exists
on them. Although studies on gang violence
have proliferated since the late 1990s, there is
a lack of detailed information about what they
actually do, why they do it, and where, as well
as about possible connections with more
complex crime networks such as drugtrafficking and social cleansing groups. Nor are
there clear-cut explanations for their existence
and their actual contribution to violence.
Indeed, various myth-like assumptions about
youth gang violence (see Moser and Winton
2002) have contributed to conflating all sorts of
youth gangs and criminalising youth. In 2003,
the ARENA central government implemented a
Plan Mano Dura (Iron Fist Policy), created to
repressively fight youth gang violence. This
policy only exacerbated the country’s violence
and increased homicide rates that had been on
a steady decline since the mid-1990s (Hume
2007a).

anyone because of the darkness and, with the
support of the PCN council, was freed of all
charges. However, as a police officer stationed
in Santiago informed me, this incident led
police to deem Santiago a “high-risk municipio”
during electoral periods. During the 2009
elections, death threats and hostilities were far
from absent.
The number of homicides in El Salvador, while
consistently high, varies from period to period,
and is concentrated in certain municipios and
towns, notably the capital and its periphery.
During the electoral campaigns at the end of
2008 and the beginning of 2009, the number of
homicides in the municipio of Santiago was
low. As soon as the 2009 elections ended,
however, homicides increased dramatically in
Santiago. This pattern mirrors the trends of the
country as a whole8. Some victims are
recognised by Santiago residents, such as the
15- and 16-year-old boys gunned down on 13
August 2009 in the centre of Santiago9. Others
remain anonymous, and may have been from
another municipio, their bodies having been
disposed of in Santiago. Most frequently the
motive of the crime is unknown, and so is the
person who has committed the crime. The
scant knowledge as to the source of the
violence renders it all the more terrifying and
results in an immediate rash of rumours trying
to make sense of it. Impunity is another
common feature of most homicides. It is rare to
hear that a case has been solved; indeed,
newspapers report on homicides but very
rarely on the judicial response or solutions.
People in Santiago often voice their fears that
relatives who leave home for the day may not
return, given the arbitrary and indiscriminate
violence that seems to predominate.

Santiago residents told me that members of
the transnational youth gangs used to
assemble in the Colonia Alvarado, a central
neighbourhood, in the early 2000s. They later
moved on to rural areas of Santiago, namely
the Santa Inés Colony in Southern Santiago,
where their activity is subject to less police
control. Since then, this colony has become a
“no-go zone”, identified by Santiago residents
as a meeting place for gang members and
hence an area to be avoided at all costs. The
majority of the gang members who assemble
there do not even live in Santiago, but rather in
the neighbouring municipios of Zacatecoluca,
San Rafael Obrajuelo, and El Rosario. As in
other areas of the country, they have clearly
marked their control over the territory of the
Santa Inés Colony, often by imposing curfews
on residents. Gang members have let it be

Youth gang violence, present throughout El
Salvador, is not absent in Santiago. MS 13 and
MS 18 are the names of the country’s main
transnational youth gangs. Named after streets
8

With more than 4,296 homicides, 2009 has
patently overcome the homicide statistics of
the preceding 10 years, consolidating El
Salvador’s position as the Latin American
country with the highest homicide rate (71 per
100,000 inhabitants). See El Diario de Hoy,
January 1, 2010, ‘El Salvador cerró 2009 como
el más letal: 4,365 asesinatos’; La Página,
January 4, 2010, ‘En El Salvador ocurrieron 71
homicidios por cada 100 mil habitantes en
2009’; La Prensa Gráfica, January 1, 2010, ‘El
2009 cerró con 4,296 homicidios en todo el
país’.
9
See La Prensa Gráfica, August 14, 2009,
‘Desconocidos asesinan a dos primos’.

10

As Santacruz Giralt and Concha-Eastman
have pointed out, youth gangs are not a recent
phenomenon in El Salvador; they already
existed before the war (2001: 24-25). What is
most likely new is their transnational character,
as well as the links of some (such as those
originated in the United States) with crime and
drug-trafficking networks.

17

owner whose business is located in the centre
of Santiago was kidnapped and killed after his
family refused to pay la renta (the rent), as the
extortion payment is popularly known due to its
often monthly character. The country’s scourge
of daily homicides, along with the constant
threat of death as a result of unpaid extortions,
reported or not, has led Santiago residents
who have faced death threats and extortion to
change their lifestyles. Telephone numbers are
immediately changed and children prohibited
from picking up the phone when it rings.
Outdoor activities are reduced to a minimum,
often restricted to work and the procurement of
essential goods. People tend to spend most of
their time at home, avoiding going out after
sunset at all costs. Metal doors and windows,
although barred, are closed two hours earlier
than before, that is, between 6 and 7 pm.
Residents who can afford it have built walls
around their houses and protected them with
barbed wire and security guards. Relationships
among neighbours, even relatives, have also
changed as a result of death threats and
extortion: people have become more distrustful
of each other and ceased political activity and
participation in local associations. In some
cases people have moved, either to another
neighbourhood, another town, or to the United
States.

known that neighbours should not be out of
their houses between 6pm and 6am,
regardless of whether this interferes with their
work schedule. Only during periods in which
gang leaders were arrested did the
neighbourhood become calmer. For instance,
until the beginning of 2009, the leaders were
absent and violence in the Santa Inés Colony
was reduced to a minimum. In 2009, however,
youth gang members returned to the area, at
which point homicides suddenly increased.
A large number of residents of Santiago’s
central neighbourhoods are or have been
subject to death threats and extortion. Via a
landline phone call or an anonymous letter slid
under the front door, they have received
threats against themselves, their children, or
their whole family: if they do not “cooperate”,
they will be killed. Death threats often precede
extortion, sometimes for a single high sum of
money and most often on a regular basis –
monthly, weekly, or even on every return trip
made by bus drivers. Most people decide not
to report these cases to the police, fearing that
those who have threatened them will somehow
learn of the report. In addition, rumours
suggest that a Santiago police officer is himself
involved in extortion, thus discouraging people
from filing reports. Paying the sum requested
by the extortionists is generally preferred, even
if it means economic hardship for the whole
family. Indeed, since 2009 there has been little
correlation between incidents of extortion and
the wealth of the targeted families. The
majority of victims turn to God rather than to
the police, praying for divine intervention. The
minority that reports death threats and
extortion to the police usually receives the
response that there is not much that can be
done. Once I accompanied a Santiago resident
to report that his parents had been called and
told that two of their sons would be killed if they
did not cooperate. The police in Zacatecoluca
simply suggested that he buy a mobile phone
and ask the extortionist to call the new number
so that future calls could be monitored. As this
did not sound like a satisfactory solution, he
and his family did not follow the advice. Death
threats often arrive at home, but they can also
come at the work place. Indeed, extortionists
tend to target most micro-businesses, both
formal and informal, especially owners of
transport vehicles, canteens and market stalls
or informal stores in the front of private houses.

Robberies committed with high calibre
weapons, along with ordinary crimes, are also
commonplace in Santiago businesses, ranging
from small market stalls in the main square to
stores, garages and canteens. As a result,
security guards for offices, businesses, or the
town council are likewise commonplace, in
Santiago as well as the rest of the country. No
delivery in this municipio takes place without
the presence of at least one armed security
guard. Yet the increasing securitisation has not
discouraged crime. What follows is the case of
one of the largest local grocery stores in
central Santiago. Because its owners are
widely known to be well-off, they have been
subject to robbery and extortion. A member of
the family was kidnapped in 2006 and released
only after a $50,000 ransom was paid by the
family. Since then, a plain-clothed but armed
security guard has watched the entrance of the
store, and the front counter is protected by a
barred fence. In 2009, the same store was
robbed; with one of the perpetrators dead and
another wounded in hospital, family members
and the security guard feared retaliation. At the
end of 2009 an underage member of the family
was kidnapped and released within a few days,
most likely after the family paid a ransom
initially set at $200,000. Small-scale robberies
also take place at Santiago’s bus stops and in

When extortionists’ demands are not met, the
consequences may very well be the
assassination of the person who did not pay, or
the kidnapping or assassination of a relative.
For instance, in 2006 the son of a garage

18

school curricula and only recently at
university11, it is not striking that a document
such as the report by the Commission on the
Truth (United Nations 1993) has, among
Salvadorans, become one of the most widely
read written accounts of the civil war. As
shaped and disseminated, the history of El
Salvador conceals much of the violence and
conflict of the 1970s12 as experienced by
Salvadorans in certain regions such as La Paz.
As shown by Moodie (forthcoming), assertions
that a state of peace has been achieved – in
the aftermath of war and following the
successful completion of transition – have
contributed to a downplaying of the high levels
of violence that persist in present-day
“peacetime”. When recognised, violence in the
post-war era is labelled ‘social’ – thus
potentially denuding it of political and official
links – and attributed to dehumanised youth. I
suggest that Santiago’s examples of pre-war
and post-war violence effectively challenge the
prevailing account of Salvadoran history as
well as the stereotypical imageries of war.
Indeed, I argue, the available historical
narratives of the war and the resort to
stereotypical imageries of war and peace have
masked much of the violence that affected
certain regions of El Salvador in the 1970s as
well as the persistence of violence in
peacetime.

the back of buses, as well as on isolated paths
in the cantons. The widespread feelings of
insecurity and the ubiquity of private security
have led to a landscape of guns, rifles, high
walls and barbed wire that isolate houses and
other buildings from the outside world.
What I have described hitherto cannot be
defined as wartime. Nor can it be defined as
peace. Narrow imageries of both war and
peace have turned post-war violence in El
Salvador
into
a
largely
depoliticised
phenomenon, a pathology no loger rooted in
political motives. This view, asserted by the
ARENA
governments
(see
Moodie
forthcoming) among others, portrays El
Salvador as epitomising a transition to
democracy. Yet the rigid categories of ‘war’
and ‘peace’, and their corresponding ‘political
violence’ and ‘social violence’, belie the
country’s war and post-war violence. Whilst
‘political violence’ is employed to designate
violence against the state or illegitimate
violence by the state, ‘social violence’
describes interpersonal violence during
peacetime (see Bourgois 2004; Cruz 2003;
Cruz et al. 1998; Hume 2007a; Moser and
Winton 2002; Santacruz Giralt and ConchaEastman 2001). As both Moodie’s research in
the immediate aftermath of the war and mine in
2008 and 2009 demonstrate, the rigid
categories of ‘political violence’ and ‘social
violence’ contribute to the obscuring and
neglecting of specific kinds of violence that
conform to neither ‘war’ nor ‘peace’
stereotypes. This is the case with the acts of
rapacity underlying the apparent political
violence in Las Ánimas; often the population
was killed or forced to leave the area, in order
for the local police forces to loot their houses.
Likewise, in the aftermath of war – during the
2009 elections, for instance – confrontations
between Salvadorans of opposing political
views became commonplace, sometimes
leading to assassinations and political
repression aimed at discouraging political
activity. In light of this, a problematisation of
the term ‘transition’, so widespread in public
discourse on El Salvador, shows up as highly
pertinent.
The Building of
Salvadoran War

the

History

of

When approaching the building of history, one
of the ways of dividing up the past in order to
make its narration and dissemination more
manageable, is to resort to grand or “critical
events” that serve as a turning point between
two historical stages (Das 1996; Jordanova
2006: 107-121). This is what historians have
referred to as ‘periodisation’ (Bentley 1996;
Davis 2008; Frank and Gills 1993; Jordanova
2006). Lauria-Santiago (1999), in referring to
the written history of nineteenth and early
twentieth century El Salvador, is critical of its
preponderant focus on coffee production. He
observes that historians have emphasised
coffee to the point of making it the epitome of
11

Historians Ricardo Antonio Argueta
Hernández and Carlos Gregorio López Bernal
work for the Universidad de El Salvador (UES),
the only public university in the country. They
informed me that it is this university that, in
2001, founded the only existing department of
history at the university level.
12
According to the Pan-American Health
Organisation (PAHO), the homicide rate during
the 1960s and 1970s hovered at 30 per
100,000 inhabitants, even higher than that of
countries such as Colombia and Nicaragua
(Cruz and Beltrán 2000: 9).

the

The historical narrative of war and peace that
prevails in El Salvador has been largely
shaped by the Salvadoran governments’ public
discourse (see Moodie forthcoming) and by
representatives of the international community
rather than by historians. In a country where
the discipline of history is barely present in

19

credibility13. This is also the case of the history
of the war in the Las Ánimas Canton, which in
various respects does not coincide with the
history commonly narrated about El Salvador
as a whole. For instance, the dramatic events
referred to as markers of the beginning and
end of the war in El Salvador are not as useful
to explain war violence in Las Ánimas. We
could also question the adequacy of the terms
‘post-war’ and ‘post-conflict’ in present-day El
Salvador and contemplate what actually would
mark the end of the post-war era (cf. Troebst
2009). While selecting temporal markers and
delineating units of study may make the task of
history-shaping more manageable, these
practices oversimplify the analysis of how
change actually occurs and how violence
originates, persists and evolves in everyday
life.

the country’s transition from traditional
agriculture to modern export-led agriculture
(Lauria-Santiago 1999: 4). In the case of the
Salvadoran war in the 1980s, its beginning and
end have been defined by two grand and
conspicuous events: the initiation of systematic
nationwide repression by the army and its
open contestation by revolutionary groups in
1980, and the signing of the Peace Accords on
16 January 1992, respectively. Even though
everyday violence by the army and the police
forces had commenced long before 1980 in
many parts of the country, as occurred in the
Las Ánimas Canton, it was military and
rebellious
operations,
that
is,
visible
confrontations between two clearly demarcated
groups (the army and police forces, on the one
hand, and the left-wing revolutionary
organisations, on the other) that were
considered
sufficiently
anomalous
and
dramatic as to inaugurate a new historical era
in El Salvador. Much of the historical literature
on the Salvadoran war refers to this period as
“a decade of terror” (Americas Watch 1991) or
“a decade of war” (Sundaram and Gelber
1991). Yet if the history of the country had
been documented ethnographically and its
local idiosyncrasies thus apprehended, the
narration of the war would most likely cover a
timespan of more than just one decade. The
study of war violence in El Salvador within the
confines of a single decade derives not just
from a particular way of dividing up the past,
but also from an approach to violence that
focuses on spectacular violent events and
neglects subtler manifestations of everyday
violence. My fieldwork in Santiago – a
municipio not known for violence either during
or after the war – along with work by members
of the Father Cosme Spessotto Committee
identifying a war historical chronology similar to
those of the surrounding municipios, reveals
that much of the country’s violence has been
ignored by the prevailing historical accounts.

The second reason why I argue that El
Salvador’s ongoing conflict is overlooked is the
predominance of stereotypical imageries of
war and peace that conceal a great deal of
people’s actual experiences. War violence is
often identified with armed combat between
two large opposing formations representing
either distinct nations or opposed parties within
a single nation. This war stereotype, I suggest,
may underlie the selection of combat between
two formations in 1980 as the time marker for
the beginning of the war in El Salvador, a
marker
that
effectively
excludes
the
systematic, yet less spectacular, violence that
preceded it in sectors like Las Ánimas. An
equally narrow depiction of El Salvador’s
peacetime has contributed to a downgrading of
post-war forms of violence. The official view is
that the war is over in present-day El Salvador;
given that war and peace are considered
mutually exclusive conditions, it follows that the
absence of war is peace. The result of this
logic is that violence in peacetime is
considered an anomalous phenomenon; yet
not one that, like war violence, fundamentally
threatens the status quo. In light of this, one
may ask what violence in peacetime means
and whether there is a ‘tolerable violence’, that
is, a degree of violence in peacetime that we
have to consider normal. The assumption that
the absence of war is peace masks the political
roots of the violence that occurs in peacetime,
including violence with political motives or the
so-called ‘social violence’ violence for which
the state may be indirectly responsible.
Accordingly, there is a tendency to
characterise post-war violence in El Salvador

16 January 1992 is an undeniably important
date for Salvadorans. Yet, despite its being a
unique political event with immense symbolic
meaning, the signing of the Peace Accords did
not have as much repercussion in the
everyday life of Salvadorans of some regions
as did other events that occurred before and
after 1992. This was undeniably the case for
the residents of Santiago, where violence and
repression diminished dramatically after 1983
but have steadily increased after the signing of
the Peace Accords. Additionally, the
predominant historical approach relies on
nation- and state-based narratives that neglect
any details that might challenge their

13

Micro-studies in history and other disciplines
have proliferated as a corrective to this
tendency, but they do not predominate.

20

raise temporal boundaries, in this case the
cessation of the war with the signing of the
Peace Accords. It is, however, necessary to
assess what the term forces us to think as well
as what it invites us to omit. Although both
‘peace’ and ‘post-war’ indicate that the war is
over, the ‘post-war’ qualifier admits the
continuing relevance of the war in explaining
the current situation. While the term ‘post-war’
certainly raises boundaries, they are diffuse
enough to enable the term to explain a present
characterised by unresolved economic and
political inequalities, ongoing violence and
rampant impunity – all of which were
themselves at the root of the war. I do not
intend to suggest that we can talk about postwar El Salvador as a homogenous period,
since there are certainly differences between
today and the 1990s, even with regard to
violence. Yet, since violence is still a burning
issue, I suggest that the term ‘post-war’
acknowledges the need to explore connections
and overlaps between present-day El Salvador
and the war of the 1980s.

as ‘social violence’. When present-day levels
of violence in post-war El Salvador are
recognised as unbearable, there is also a
tendency to consider it a social pathology (‘a
pandemia’, according to the definition provided
by the World Health Organisation for such high
levels of daily deaths) – one whose
manifestations differ from traditional war
imagery – rather than the result of political and
economic problems that, while transformed,
have transcended the war and persist in
peacetime.
Yet for many Salvadorans “it [peace] is worse
than the war” (Moodie 2002) or, as I was told
during my fieldwork by Santiago Nonualco’s
inhabitants, in present-day El Salvador “there
is neither war nor peace”. Their memories and
experiences of violence reveal the inadequacy
of the war/peace binary. The widespread
presence of the term ‘transition’ in public
discourse to describe the aftermath of war
would seem legitimised by the existence of a
liminal interval which is “neither war nor
peace”. Yet, the conception of transition carries
within it a very specific notion of change that
does not apply to the case of El Salvador. The
teleological and unilateral character of
transition entails a direction and progression
that the persistence of violence in post-war El
Salvador defies. I do not deny that there have
been changes since the official end of the war,
but these – negotiated by political elites – have
come to fruition in more gradual, blurred and
uncertain ways than those implied by
‘transition’. Another possible misconception to
be gleaned from Santiago residents’
description of the aftermath of the war as
“neither war nor peace” is an assumption that
El Salvador has simply not completed its
transition from war to peace. If this were the
case, we would have to imagine Salvadorans’
lives as suspended on a trajectory toward
peace – a contradiction in terms. The
encroachment of violence on peacetime
reveals that change is more accurately thought
as a continuum than as the progression
implied by a term like ‘transition’. In this
respect, parallels can be drawn to the
exploration of change in post-socialist
countries (see Berdahl et al 2000; Bridger and
Pine 1998; Burawoy and Verdery 1999; Creed
1998; Hann 2002; Verdery 1991).

Conclusion: Implications for Understanding
the Aftermath of War
This article does not aim to criticise or discard
the existing written history on El Salvador,
whether by scholars or others, but rather to
show the need to increase our awareness of
how history is shaped and who participates in
its shaping, so that we can identify who and
what may have been excluded in that practice,
and why, especially in the case of
contemporary El Salvador, whose history has
yet to be written and analysed. Additionally,
there is a need to build history less on grand
events and more on gradual changes and
processes, that is, on ethnographic research
that yields a nuanced comprehension of the
everyday experiences absent from large scale
historical narratives. I am thus suggesting the
blurring of historical markers, such that history
does not appear as a simple and logical
succession of discrete stages whose
boundaries are defined by certain “critical
events”. This is not to say that a different
history of contemporary El Salvador should be
written, but rather that an awareness of how
the most recent history has been shaped is
fundamental to exploring how change takes
place. What I hope to have made clear in this
article is that periods of peace and war do not
follow each other but rather overlap and
intermingle – most visibly at the local and
everyday level – to the extent that sometimes
the definition of their boundaries is difficult to
determine and the decision to label them either
‘war’ or ‘peace’ may be more political than

With regard to the labelling of historical stages
as ‘pre-’, ‘neo-‘, or ‘post-‘, I argue, following
Humphrey (2002), that the discussion should
be historicised and localised in order to
determine the usefulness of these prefixes. To
refer to present-day El Salvador as a ‘postconflict’ or ‘post-war’ society does certainly

21

Burawoy, Michael and Verdery, Katherine
(eds.)
(1999):
Uncertain
Transition:
Ethnographies of Change in the Postsocialist
World. Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers.

intellectual. During some stages of the
Salvadoran war there was actually less combat
and violence than there is today, which leads
to the conclusion that present-day El Salvador
is, in certain key respects – its high homicide
rates and the widespread fear of its people –
closer to a state of war than to a state of
peace, even if it does not totally fall into either
category. To appreciate the ambiguous nature
of Salvadoran history requires recognition of
both the disruptive quality of violence in
peacetime and the ordinariness of wartime
violence.

Byrne, Hugh (1996): El Salvador’s Civil War: A
Study of Revolution. Colorado: Lynne Rienner
Publishers.
Creed, Gerald W. (1998): Domesticating
Revolution: From Socialist Reform to
Ambivalent Transition in a Bulgarian Village.
Pennsylvania:
The
Pennsylvania
State
University Press.

Bibliography

Cruz, José Miguel (2003): Violencia y
democratización en Centroamérica: elimpacto
del crimen en la legitimidad de los regímenes
de posguerra. In: América Latina Hoy, No. 35,
pp. 19-59.

Alvarenga, Patricia (2006): Cultura y ética de
la violencia: El Salvador 1880-1932. San
Salvador: Concultura.
Americas Watch (1991): El Salvador’s Decade
of Terror: Human Rights since the
Assassination of Archbishop Romero. London:
Yale University Press.

Cruz, José Miguel (2007): Factors Associated
with Juvenile Gangs in Central America. In:
Cruz, J. M. (ed.). Street Gangs in Central
America. San Salvador: UCA Editores.

Anderson, Thomas P. (1971): Matanza: El
Salvador’s Communist Revolt of 1932. Lincoln
and London: University of Nebraska Press.

Cruz, José Miguel et al. (1998): La violencia en
El Salvador en los años noventa. Magnitud,
costos y factores posibilitadores. San
Salvador: IUDOP.

Baloyra, Enrique (1982): El Salvador in
Transition. Chapel Hill: The University of North
Carolina Press.

Cruz, José Miguel and Beltrán, María
Antonieta (2000): Las armas de fuego en El
Salvador: situación e impacto sobre la
violencia. San Salvador: UCA.

Barraza Ibarra, Jorge (2001): La gesta de
Anastasio
Aquino
(Una
aproximación
histórica).
San
Salvador:
Universidad
Tecnológica de El Salvador.

Das, Veena (1995): Critical Events: An
Anthropological Perspective on Contemporary
India. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Bentley, Jerry H. (1996): Cross-Cultural
Interactions and Periodization in World History.
In: The American Historical Review, Vol. 101,
No. 3, pp. 749-770.

Davis, Kathleen (2008): Periodization and
Sovereignty: How Ideas of Feudalism and
Secularization Govern the Politics of Time.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Berdahl, Daphne et al. (2000): Altering States:
Ethnographies of Transition in Eastern Europe
and the Former Soviet Union. Ann Arbor: The
University of Michigan Press.

Domínguez Sosa, Julio Alberto (2007):
Anastasio Aquino. Caudillo de las tribus
nonualcas. San Salvador: Ediciones Venado
del Bosque.

Bridger, Sue and Pine, Frances (eds.) (1998):
Surviving Post-Socialism: Local Strategies and
Regional Responses in Eastern Europe and
the Former Soviet Union. London & New York:
Routledge.

Dunkerley, James (1982): The Long War:
Dictatorship and Revolution in El Salvador.
London: Junction Books.

Bourgois, Philippe (2004): The Continuum of
Violence in War and Peace: Post-Cold War
Lessons from El Salvador. In: ScheperHughes, Nancy and Bourgois, Philippe. (eds.):
Violence in War and Peace: An Anthology.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

Frank, Andre. G. and Gills, Barry K. (eds.)
(1993): The World System: Five Hundred
Years or Five Thousand? London: Routledge.
Galeas, Geovani and Ayala, Berne (2008):
Informe de una matanza. Grandeza y miseria

22

Montgomery, Tommie S. (1982): Revolution in
El Salvador: Origins and Evolution. Colorado:
Westview Press.

en una guerrilla. San Salvador: Centroamérica
21.
García Dueñas, Lauri (2006): La trascendencia
de la campaña del “miedo” en las elecciones
de 2004 y la propaganda del “peligro” en
México en 2006. In: Realidad, No. 109, pp.
375-387.

Montgomery, Tommie S. (1995): Getting to
Peace in El Salvador: The Roles of the United
Nations Secretariat and ONUSAL. In: Journal
of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs,
Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 139-172.

Gould, Jeffrey L. and Lauria-Santiago, Aldo A.
(2008): 1932: Rebelión en la oscuridad. San
Salvador: Museo de la Palabra y la Imagen.

Moodie, Ellen (2002): “It’s Worse than the
War”: Telling Everyday Danger in Post-War
San Salvador. PhD thesis, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Hann, Chris M. (ed.) (2002): Postsocialism:
Ideals, Ideologies and Practices in Eurasia.
London: Routledge.

Moodie, Ellen (2004): ‘“El Capitán Cinchazo”:
Blood and Meaning in Postwar San Salvador’,
in Lauria-Santiago, A. and Binford, L. (eds.).
Landscapes of Struggle: Politics, Society, and
Community in El Salvador. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press.

Hume, Mo (2007a): Mano Dura: El Salvador
Responds to Gangs. In: Development in
Practice, Vol. 17, No. 6, pp. 725-738.
Hume, Mo (2007b): (Young) Men with Big
Guns: Reflexive Encounters with Violence and
Youth in El Salvador. In: Bulletin of Latin
American Research, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 480496.

Moodie, Ellen (forthcoming): El Salvador in the
Aftermath of Peace: Crime, Uncertainty and
the Transition to Democracy. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Moser, Caroline and Winton, Ailsa (2002):
Working Paper 171: Violence in the Central
American Region: Towards an Integrated
Framework for Violence Reduction. London:
Overseas Development Institute. Available at:
http://www.odi.org.uk/publications/working_pap
ers/wp171_a.pdf (Accessed 1 December
2009).

Humphrey, Caroline (2002): Does the
Category ‘Postsocialist’ Still Make Sense? In:
Hann, Chris M. (ed.): Postsocialism: Ideals,
Ideologies and Practices in Eurasia. London:
Routledge.
Jordanova, Ludmilla (2006): History
Practice. London: Hodder Arnold.

in

Panamá, David E. (2005): Los guerreros de la
libertad. San Salvador: Versal Books.

Lauria-Santiago, Aldo (1999): An Agrarian
Republic: Commercial Agriculture and the
Politics of Peasant Communities in El
Salvador, 1823-1914. Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh.

Parkman,
Patricia
(1988):
Nonviolent
Insurrection in El Salvador: The Fall of
Maximiliano Hernández Martínez. Tucson: The
University of Arizona Press.

López Bernal, Carlos G. (2007): Lecturas
desde la derecha y la izquierda sobre el
levantamiento de 1932: implicaciones políticoculturales. In: Ching E. et al. Las masas, la
matanza y el martinato en El Salvador. San
Salvador: UCA Editores.

Peña, Lorena (2009): Retazos de mi vida.
Testimonio de una revolucionaria salvadoreña.
México: Editorial Ocean Sur.
Ramos, Carlos Guillermo (2000): Marginación,
exclusión social y violencia. In: Ramos, Carlos
Guillermo (ed.): Violencia en una sociedad en
transición: Ensayos. San Salvador: PNUD.

López Bernal, Carlos G. (2008): El
levantamiento de los indios nonualcos en
1832. Hacia una nueva interpretación. In:
Hacer historia en El Salvador, No. 01, Año 01,
pp. 23-28.

Richards, Paul (2005): New War: An
Ethnographic Approach. In: Richards, P. (ed.):
No Peace, No War: An Anthropology of
Contemporary Armed Conflicts. Oxford: James
Currey Ltd.

López Pintor, Rafael (1999): Votos Contra
Balas. Barcelona: Editorial Planeta.
Marroquín, Alejandro D. (1964): San Pedro
Nonualco.
San
Salvador:
Editorial
Universitaria.

Sánchez Cerén, Salvador (2008): Con sueños
se escribe la vida. Autobiografía de un

23

http://www.koerberstiftung.de/fileadmin/user_upload/allgemein/do
ssiers/Stefan_Troebst.pdf, viewed on 16
January 2010.

revolucionario salvadoreño. México: Editorial
Ocean Sur.
Santacruz Giralt, María and Concha-Eastman,
Alberto (2001): Barrio adentro: la solidaridad
violenta de las pandillas. San Salvador:
IUDOP.

United Nations (1992): Los Acuerdos de Paz.
San Salvador: Arcoiris.
United Nations (1993): Informe de la Comisión
de la Verdad para El Salvador. De la Locura a
la Esperanza: La Guerra de 12 años en El
Salvador. San Salvador: Arcoiris.

Sriram, Chandra L. (2004): Confronting Past
Human Rights Violations: Justice vs. Peace in
Times of Transition. New York: Frank Cass.
Sundaram, Anjali and Gelber, George (eds.)
(1991): A Decade of War: El Salvador
Confronts the Future. New York: Monthly
Review Press.

Verdery,
Katherine
(1991):
Theorizing
Socialism: A Prologue to the "Transition". In:
American Ethnologist, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 419439.

Troebst, Stefan (2009): “1989” as a European
Lieu de Mémoire, or: Is the Postwar Period
Over? Paper presented at the Meeting of the
Affinity Group “Civic Education and History
Dialogue for Europe”.

Winton, Ailsa (2004): Young People’s Views on
How to Tackle Gang Violence in “Post-Conflict”
Guatemala. In: Environment and Urbanization,
Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 83-99.

24

some stable agriculture and sheep rearing and
hosting camel nomads from the north during
the dry season. The southern belt of Darfur
has rich savannah pastures and is known for
extensive cattle herding.
Darfur was an independent sultanate under
the virtually uninterrupted rule of the Keira-Fur
dynasty2 until 1916 when the Anglo-Egyptian
Condominium incorporated it into Sudan.
Darfur has always been a meeting place
between North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa
as well as between West Africa and the Nile
Basin; thus, its population is ethnically diverse.
The oldest inhabitants are sedentary farmers
with the Fur as the biggest group. They were
the founders of the Keira-Fur sultanate and the
traditional rulers of the region. Nomads herding
cattle and camels came later to Darfur. The
biggest pastoralist group is the Rizayqat. The
major contribution of Darfur to the national
economy is livestock.

Politics of Identity and Local
Conflict in Darfur
Regine Penitsch
Abstract
The international media have generally
presented the conflict in Darfur as one
between the Sudanese government backed by
Arab militias on one side, and African
insurgents on the other. Even though the
shortcomings of the “Arabs versus Africans”
explanation have been explored in many
publications
on
Darfur,
this
dualistic
simplification remains central to many
analyses. Drawing upon fieldwork conducted in
Khartoum, I argue that the polarization of
identities is not a root cause but an outcome of
the conflict in Darfur, and show the historical
emergence
and
development
of
this
dichotomy. Further, I demonstrate that this
polarization can be upheld only by concealing
crucial facts that do not fit the dichotomy.
Political elites involved in the civil war use
identity categories as instruments in complex
power struggles. The disentanglement of the
Arab-African-dichotomy may support a better
understanding of the needs, motivations and
aims of the different actors involved in the
conflict and its ongoing dynamics. The
example of Jabal Marra is used to analyse
groups’ motivation to join specific parties in this
conflict

In 2003 two rebel movements, the Sudan
Liberation Movement/ Army (SLM/A) and the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), began
attacking government targets in Darfur. The
most intense period of fighting occurred during
2003 and 2004, between the rebels and
government forces. Political efforts towards the
settlement of the conflict resulted in the Darfur
Peace Agreement in May 2006. This
agreement produced further complications
such as the splintering of the rebel groups and
the multiplication of confrontations between all
the conflict parties. In May 2008 JEM reached
Omdurman, the twin city of Sudan’s capital
Khartoum. This was the first strike on the
capital in thirty years and constituted a
significant milestone in the Darfur civil war.
However, the battle field is Darfur, resulting in
around 2 million internally displaced people
and 200,000 refugees in Chad. Violence
increased again in 2008 and access for
humanitarian agencies became more difficult.
In March 2009 the chief prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court requested an
arrest warrant against President Al-Bashir for
crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed in Darfur.

Introduction1
Darfur comprises the north-western corner of
Sudan, borders Libya, Chad and the Central
African Republic and covers a territory of
around the size of France; comprising one fifth
of the total area of Sudan. Ecologically Darfur
ranges from desert in the north to rich
marshland savannah in the south. The
northern desert is dominated by nomadic
pastoralism with camel and sheep, the semidesert south with little more rainfall allows a
limited cultivation of millet. The Jabal Marra
plateau in the centre of Darfur reaches about
10,000 feet above sea level. Here, due to
stable rainfall and good soil quality, intensive
agriculture is possible. Sandy plains to the east
and clay soils to the west of the Jabal Marra
with adequate rainfall provide the conditions for

It might seem late to add an article to the
pile of existing publications exploring
explanations of the conflict in Darfur, especially
2

One can find the names Keira sultanate, Fur
sultanate, Keira-Fur sultanate or Darfur
sultanate but all refer to the same entity. The
Keira dynasty started the rule over a region
inhabited by the Fur in the Jabal Marra area
with Sulayman Solong around 1650. The Keira
gradually merged with the Fur.

1

This chapter is based on 15 months of
fieldwork in Khartoum between August 2007
and March 2009 as part of a PhD research
project at the Max-Planck-Institute for Social
Anthropology, Halle (Saale), Germany.

25

at a time when dialogue is centered on
solutions, peace and compensation.3 However,
the current analyses of this conflict; especially
concerning the relevance of identity, have
been rather unsatisfactory. In general, the
international media presents the conflict in
Darfur as one between the Sudanese
government backed by Arab militias on one
side, and African insurgents on the other. One
extreme position holds that genocide is being
committed in Darfur. It is clear to any observer
who looks more deeply at the situation that the
view “Arabs attack Africans” is a simplification,
but there are reasons why this dichotomy
exists and why it has prevailed until now.
I
challenge
this
polarization
by
demonstrating that it can be upheld only by
concealing crucial facts that do not fit the
dichotomy. The political elites involved in the
civil war have no interest in clarifying this
blurred picture; on the contrary, it serves their
interests. It is my aim to illuminate some of the
omissions in the narrative about the Darfur
conflict. My argument follows two central
themes. First, I look at the semantics of the
terms Arab and African and their Arabic
translations in the context of the Darfur conflict,
arab and zurqa. I argue that several
misunderstandings and misuses have occurred
over time, and their current usage is also
influenced by national, regional, and global
discourses. On the national level, the struggle
for a national identity after independence plays
a role; particularly the focus on an Arab-Islamic
identity by the hegemonic discourses of the
governments of Khartoum. This vision has
been countered by the idea of a “New Sudan”
employing a multicultural definition of the
nation, promoted by the late John Garang, the
former leader of the rebel group Southern
Peoples
Liberation
Movement/
Army
(SPLM/A). The SPLM/A was involved in civil
war in the southern parts of Sudan for several
decades until a peace agreement was reached
in 2005. I will show that the transfer of the
terms “Arab” and “African” (which have
emerged in the context of the southern civil
war) to the Darfur context is flawed, as there
are fundamental differences between these
regions. Darfur is part of northern Sudan, with
a long history as an independent sultanate until
1916. In addition, its location on the western
periphery of Sudan distinguishes Darfur in
comparison to other regions of Sudan – Chad,
Libya and parts of West Africa influence Darfur
even more than Khartoum. These specificities

include the Darfurian perception of Arab and
non-Arab as well as the second aspect of my
argument: Who sides with whom in the current
conflict. Revealing the weakness of the ArabAfrican dichotomy by examining the matter on
the level of semantics forms the basis for
criticizing the perception that the two sides in
the conflict can be identified by their ethnic
identity. By stressing the fact that there is a
local perception of Arab and non-Arab, I want
to outline that the alliance between the central
government and the militias in Darfur is not
based on Arab brotherhood, but rather on
complementary interests. The exceptions
where Arabs side with insurgents and nonArabs with the government forces reveal a
deeper pattern; where local actors ally with the
forces that can support them in the pursuit of
their own aims.
In this article, the Jabal Marra area in the heart
of Darfur serves as an example of the
dynamics of the relationship between the Fur,
a non-Arab group, and several Arab groups
with whom they have contact. The analysis of
Jabal Marra addresses root causes of the
violent conflict on the local level, and shows
how the current local conflicts in Darfur and the
civil war between insurgents and the Sudanese
government influence each other. The ArabAfrican dichotomy has served to trigger fears
against the other - and this other has been
produced by consolidating the various ethnic
groups under the two blocs arab and zurqa. At
this point the issue of identity enters the
conflict. Hence one outcome - and not cause of the current conflict in Darfur is the
construction of the identities of arab and zurqa
with new meanings. Currently these terms are
highly emotionally loaded with mistrust and
fear, and embody the opposition of perpetrator
and victim. The future will show how these
meanings are transformed.
Identity
Politics
Government

of

the

Sudanese

The successive governments of Sudan have
influenced the polarization between Arabs and
Africans
since
the
country
gained
independence in 1956, when Arabic was
declared the only official language and Islam
the state religion. Since this time, the concept
of an Arab-Islamic nation has been propagated
as the basis for the national identity. Under
President Al-Numairi (1969-1985) PanArabism gained momentum and Shari’a Laws
were established as the law of the country.
Islamism and Arabism became part of the
state’s self-definition, and this found symbolic
expression in the transformation of the national

3

Examples for publications about the Darfur
conflict are Flint/ de Waal 2005 and 2008;
Ghaffar/ Manger 2006; Hassan/Ray 2009;
Marchal 2008; Prunier 2005; Young 2005.

26

flag in 1970 into the current one, which
resembles the flags of other Arab national
flags.4 During the government of Sadiq alMahdi (1986-1989) the two biggest parties
managed to gain the support of the biggest
ethnic groups in Darfur; it was perceived that
the Umma Party under Sadiq al-Mahid backed
the Arab groups, while the Democratic Union
Party (DUP) supported the Fur. For Al-Mahdi
and his Umma Party, it seemed necessary to
win Darfur in order to gain political success
(Prunier 2005: 52, Salih 2005: 153-154). AlMahdi began to recruit and arm Arab groups
(mainly cattle herders) and to deploy them as
militia against the SPLM/A in south Darfur from
1986 onwards. In 1987, the “Arab Gathering”
emerged. In an open letter to president AlMahdi, 23 prominent Darfurian Arabs claimed
that Arab tribes represented more than 70% of
Darfur’s total population. Despite being
socially, and economically predominant, they
claimed that they were marginalised in political
representation in Darfur. This letter was
followed by pamphlets entitled “Quraysh 1, 2,
and 3”.5 In particular Quraysh 2, probably
dating from 1987, promotes Arab superiority in
Darfur and aims at pushing non-Arabs out of
the region (Flint/ de Waal 2008: 50).
In addition to the governments’ clear
Islamist direction, Arabism became stronger as
a racial ideology during the 1980s. President
Al-Bashir, who came into power in 1989, used
the nexus between Arabism and Islamism to
mobilize support for a war against the south
under the label of jihad (Lesch 1998: 22). His
regime continued to support Arab military
groups and mobilised them in the fight against
the SPLM/A. Simultaneously, winning them
over to his side served to undermine the
foundation of the Umma party (Prunier 2005:
75).
The specific facts about the Arab Gathering
as an organization remain unclear, and the
authorship of the pamphlets is unknown, but it
is likely that this propaganda was more
influenced by Libya’s Muammar Ghadafi and
his Sahelian Pan-Arab struggle than by
Darfurian or Khartoum-based actors (Prunier
2005: 174, footnote 51; Flint/ de Waal 2008:
52). It is debatable to what extent the
propaganda reflected or resulted in a
conviction of Arab superiority among Arab
groups in Darfur. However, it fitted well into the
polarization process. During the 1981

provincial elections ethnicity had already
become a key political factor. When the Fur
politician Ahmed Diraige became governor of
Darfur in 1980 the Fur became more selfconfident, and the concerns of the
disadvantages faced by Arab groups were
substantiated (Flint/ de Waal 2008: 49). The
reaction to the foundation of the Darfur
Liberation Front led by Abd al-Wahid
Muhammad al-Nur in 2002 was similar;
opponents started to ask from whom the Fur
aimed to liberate Darfur, and the direct answer
– “from the Arabs” – provoked fears amongst
Arab groups.6
Al-Bashir’s government increased its
influence in Darfur by re-shaping the
administrative system; the single state of
Darfur was divided into three states in 1994.
For the first time, the Fur became a minority
group in each of the new states. The
government tried to co-opt the personnel of the
new administration with material means, and
the newly created political, juridical and
administrative posts were given preferably to
candidates who stood close to the government
(cf. Khalid 2009 (63) and Abdul-Jalil 2009
(327)). Al-Bashir’s government withdrew from
extreme political Arabism and Islamism in the
late 1990s, in the context of the negotiations
between the ruling National Congress Party
and the insurgent SPLM/A to end the civil war
in the South. Despite this, his regime continues
to be Arab-centric and Islamist, although in a
less radical form than previously.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) of January 2005 plays an important role
in the war in Darfur, although it mainly
concerns the Khartoum government and the
southern rebel movement SPLM/A. The CPA
introduced a quota for sharing political power
and wealth between the SPLM and the
National Congress Party (NCP). Despite its
name the agreement was not comprehensive,
but rather concerned the southern regions
whilst neglecting other parts of the country.
However, the “lesson learnt” for everyone was
that armed struggle is rewarded by
negotiations, and may lead to enhanced
political power. The outcome of the civil war in
the south influenced the establishment of two
insurgent movements in Darfur, the Sudan
Liberation Movement/ Army (SLM/A) and the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM). Rumors
suggest that groups of Darfur insurgents tried
to build an alliance ranging from Darfur to
Kordofan (eastern Sudan) and maybe even to
parts of the northern Nile and the Blue Nile

4

Concerning the contest of national identity
see e.g. Lesch 1998 (38-46) and Sharkey 2007
(34-36).
5
Banu Quraysh was a prominent tribe of
ancient Mecca and Prophet Mohammad its
descendant.

6

Interview with a member of the Darfur
Development Front, Khartoum, 03/2009. Cf.
e.g. Khalid 2009 (62).

27

– some of them ready to use violent means11 –
emerged in Darfur in the late 1950s and mid1960s. The previously mentioned SLM/A and
JEM both came into existence in 2003.

states. Such an alliance would pose a
considerable challenge to the governing
National Congress Party (NCP). It is
controversial in Khartoum whether these
movements could threaten the government
militarily. Attacks on Omdurman on 10 May
2008 by the JEM were interpreted by many as
a dangerous sign.7

There is nothing like a natural loyalty between
Arab groups from the centre and the Darfurian
Arabs. Although Darfurians are Muslims, there
is a hierarchy between the ethnic groups who
embody the top positions of the national
political power structure, and other groups
including the Arabs and non-Arabs of Darfur.
This is reflected in the emic term awlad albahr, “sons of the river” (Nile), self-appointed
by the riverine Arabs in order to express their
distinction as “true Sudanese” from others, e.g.
the awlad al-gharb or gharaba, literally “sons of
the West” or “Westerners”. The latter term
includes Kordofan and Darfur, Arabs and nonArabs. Gharaba, people from the West, are
also suspected of not being “real Sudanese”.
The perception among the population of the
peripheries is that members of the political and
economic hegemonic centre in Khartoum do
not accept someone from the periphery in a
powerful position or as part of the ruling elite.
This point was strongly made by the Fur
politician Daoud Bolad who became a
chairman of the Muslim Brotherhooddominated Khartoum University Students’
Union in the end of the 1970s. The Muslim
Brotherhood was renamed National Islamic
Front in 1985. Later, however, he was
disappointed by the discrimination he faced as
a Darfurian by the national political elite (the
Muslim Brotherhood) during the 1980s.12
Paradoxically, some Darfur Arabs look
down on the Arabs of the Nile Valley (such as
the Danagla, Ja’aliyiin, and the Shaygiyya
groups). The authors of Quraysh 2, Arab
Darfurians, see a clear difference between the
Arabs in Darfur and the riverine Arabs. The
Darfurian Arabs deny the authenticity of the
riverine Arabs because of the Nubian
influences in their genealogies. Thus the
Khartoum government, composed of these
riverine Arabs, would be an obstacle for proper
Arab rule (“Quraysh 2” in Hassan/Ray 2009:
452).
This is only one example of the
ambivalences inherent in the Arab-African
polarization. Another example concerns the
synonymous portrayal of Darfur Arabs with the

Identity Politics of the Insurgents
The insurgents of Darfur refer to themselves as
“movements” or “armed opposition”. They
express their right to take up arms as citizens
of Sudan against the current Sudanese
government, which they often call a
“dictatorship”, implying that it is not the
legitimate leadership of the country.8
Darfur has long tried to keep its autonomy
against rulers from outside. Darfur and Sinnar
were the only independent territories before
the Turco-Egyptian occupation of the territory
of what is today known as the country Sudan.
The Keira-Fur sultanate in the Jabal Marra
region serves as a reference for a regional
identity comprising both non-Arabs and Arabs,
demarcating it as a separate unit to central
Sudan (de Waal 2009: 126). This is reflected
by the category of identification ahl dar Fur,
people from the homeland of the Fur. Darfur
revolted against the Turco-Egyptian colonial
power several times9 and lost its sovereignty
only in 1917. Darfurians showed the will to
reassert their independence even during the
short interplay of independence under AlMahdi (1881-1898) (Braukämper 1992: 138f;
O’Fahey 1980: 148). Both Arabs and nonArabs perceived the rule of Al-Mahdi like the
Turco-Egyptian occupation as ‘foreign’, i.e.
emanating from the Nile Valley.10 Several
political
organizations
opposing
the
centralization of power in Khartoum and the
lack of regional participation in decision making

7

JEM members arrived with 80 to 300 vehicles
and took over the police station in Omdurman
by force, killing six local police officers (United
Nations Security Council 2008: 1).
8
Interviews with several members of the
opposition, including members and ex-fighters
of the Darfur insurgent movements.
9
For example the revolt of Abdullah al-Sihaynirevolt in Nyala 1921 (Woodward 1990: 28).
10
This contradicts the popular Sudanese
perception that the Mahdiyya was a largely
‘Western’ movement, particularly after the
death of the riverine-born Mahdi and
Abdullahi’s ascent to power (Prunier 2005: 1820).

11

For more details see e.g. “On the failure of
Darfur peace talks in Abuja” by Abaker
Mohamed
Abuelbashar,
www.sudantribune.com, 7 Jan 2010.
12
Interview with a writer and journalist and
member of the Darfur Development Front,
02/2009, Khartoum.

28

On the global level, it is assumed that
international actors are more likely to intervene
if they can associate a conflict to elements of
cultural oppression of an indigenous
population. This assumption weighs heavy in
light of the international community’s reaction
to media images of Darfur. The image of
Africans being suppressed, or even being
victims of genocide, facilitates dialogue with
other oppressed groups and their advocates.
The legitimacy of awareness- and fund-raising
in terms of ‘Arabs kill Africans’ fits a popular
stereotype of the violent, intolerant, racist Arab.
I argue that a description of complex
interrelations between Darfurians beyond this
simple dichotomy of Africans and Arabs would
not meet such an attention by the international
public. The most prominent Darfur-related
campaigns promote either a Pan-African or an
anti-genocide discourse that creates solidarity
and mobilises support. The most active leaders
of this discourse are not Sudanese but are
found among human rights activists in Western
countries and are often influenced by an antiArab discourse in the context of the world past
9/11 (Hassan 2009: 154-158). The benefits of
this connection are manifold for the insurgents,
including logistic and material support including
weapons and a general sympathy for their
ambitions. Being a non-Arab Darfurian opens
the access to symbolic and material resources
on many occasions, one example being that
non-Arab Darfurians are study grants by South
African university in South Africa on the basis
of African brotherhood. Coming from a nonArabic group in Darfur thus the basis for
solidarity from outside.

government and the government militias. Most
of the people who ally with the government
stem from Darfur Arab groups (however not
because of an Arab heritage but rather due to
other factors, as I demonstrate throughout this
paper). Amongst the international public, the
image prevails that the majority of the
Darfurian Arabs side with the government
against the non-Arab groups. Examples of
Arab groups who are not allied with the
government have been presented as
exceptions. There are no statistics about this
division, but rough estimates from early 2006
by “an Arab intellectual sympathetic to the
Darfur rebels” (Flint 2008) suggest that ninety
percent of the Arabs of Darfur were neutral.
This view is supported by international
assessments of the conflict dynamics after the
Darfur Peace Agreement (May 2006), which
claim that several Arab groups have left the
government or given up their neutral position in
order to ally with the insurgents (Flint 2008;
International Crisis Group 2007: 2-4).
The question arises why the presentation of
the conflict as one between “Arabs and nonArabs” and even as “Arabs exploit and/or kill
(Black) Africans” has also been consolidated
among
the
insurgents,
taking
into
consideration that the whole population of
Darfur (and not only the non-Arab groups) has
suffered. Statements using this terminology
can be associated with national politics, but are
also connected to global discourses which in
turn provide a basis for access to symbolic and
material resources.
On the national level, the stress of an
African identity establishes ties to the
discourse of a “New Sudan” in order to counter
the Islamist governments claim for an ArabIslamic state; this discourse envisages a
secular and democratic Sudan promoted by
the late John Garang. Garang has reached out
to the Nuba and peoples of southern Blue Nile
under the label of an African identity (cf. Flint/
de Waal 2008: 21). Some of the Darfurian
educated elite chose “African” as one of the
identity markers in order to build political
alliances. The SPLM/A has assisted in the
building of a group with a political program of
national and not only Darfur-related scope,
symbolized by the renaming of the “Darfur
Liberation Front” (DLF) to “Sudan Liberation
Movement” (SLM) (de Waal 2009: 139-140).
The agenda’s up scaling to the whole Sudan
was accompanied by the emergence of the
African and anti-Arab factor.13

An Analysis of Identities in Darfur before
the War
In the Western media, the war between the
southern insurgency and the government has
been described as one between “African
Christians” against “Muslim Arabs”. The
reporting on the Darfur conflict looses the
reference to religion but sticks to the
terminology of “Arab” vs. “(Black) African”.14
However, it does not make sense to use these
terms for both the citizens of the southern
states of Sudan and for the “non-Arabs” of
Darfur. The differences are rooted in the
14

See for example www.sudantribune.com.
The “SudanTribune” is a non-profit internet
website based in France. It provides news,
analysis and commentary, official reports,
press releases and maps from SudanTribune
or other agencies on Sudan and neighbouring
countries. It should not be confused with the
Sudanese newspaper “Sudan Tribune”.

13

Interviews with a journalist, Khartoum
02/2009.

29

Arabization and Islamization are missing in the
latter (cf. e.g. Beshir 1984 (24)). In an early
political declaration the SLM/A even declared
that “the Arab tribes and groups are an integral
and indivisible component of Darfur’s social
fabric who have been equally marginalized and
deprived of their rights to development and
genuine political participation.”16 The key factor
which prompts many citizens of western Sudan
to turn against their government is the unequal
distribution of economic resources between the
center and the peripheries.17
A
variety
of
social
and
cultural
identifications was used by the people in
Darfur before the war. The broadest category
was the previously mentioned ahl Darfur. The
category qabila was socially the most
important one, translated as tribe or ethnic
group. Until recently, Darfur has been home to
a society in which cultivators and pastoralists
live
mutually
complementary
lifestyles.
Cultivators were the earlier inhabitants of the
region; the pastoralist livelihood came to Darfur
through later immigration. Arab camel
pastoralists had not reached an important
scale before the 15th century and their partial
transformation to cattle herders developed only
since the 18th century (Braukämper 1992: 72;
114-116).
The English term “Arab” is a direct
translation of the Arabic term arab, but the
content is not as obvious as it seems. In Darfur
in particular, the term arab has a different
meaning than in other contexts. Religion does
not contribute to ethnic categorizations in this
context because all groups in Darfur are
Muslim, except those who have immigrated
from southern Sudan. In general, authors
writing on Darfur classify a group as arab when
its members speak only Arabic and no other
language, which applies to people originating
from Arab speaking countries. However, there
are groups who have been linguistically

unequal relations between regional areas; the
south and the north on one side, and the west
and the centre on the other. These relations
influence the definition of marginalization itself,
and the content of identification categories.
One remarkable difference between the northsouth-axis and the centre-west-axis stems
from the history of the slave trade during the
18th and 19th centuries, which inculcated a
residual prejudice of northerners towards
southerners and resentment of the southerners
towards northerners. This does not apply to
western Sudan, however. On the contrary,
Darfur under the Keira-Fur sultanate (approx.
1650-1916) was heavily involved in slave
trading and ownership, but not as victims of
slavery themselves (O’Fahey 1973: 43). The
slave raids reinforced the difference between
the Darfur Muslim traders and raiders and
southern non-Muslims among whom people
were enslaved (Beswick 2006: 14 and 158;
O’Fahey 2008: 244). Another difference
between the regions is the result of the divideand-rule policy of the British Colonial
administration, manifested in the Closed
District Ordinance Act of 1920 which isolated
the south. Entry by northerners was highly
restricted, and Arabization or Islamization did
not occur in these regions due to this enforced
isolation. In contrast, Darfur has been part of
northern Sudan since the British colonial
period, and Islam and the Arabic language and
culture were never seen as elements imposed
on the Darfurians by the rulers of the centre.
Islam was brought from West Africa in the 16th
century by Muslim Fulbe scholars, but it was
only in the 18th century that Muslim holy men
from the Nile Valley expanded their influence in
Darfur.15 Some of my interview respondants
pointed out the relaxed religious interaction
between Fur and Arabs of that time by the
name for the region itself: dar is an Arabic
word (literally “house”, in Darfur: “homeland”),
and Fur is the name of the ethnic group
building the Keira-Fur sultanate (O’Fahey
2008: 22, 40, 42 and 224).
These historical differences between northsouth and centre-west relations inevitably
influence the analysis of marginalization of the
Sudanese south and Darfur. Elements of a
cultural colonialism in terms of forced

16

“The Sudan Liberation Movement and
Sudan Liberation Army (SLM/ SLA): Political
Declaration”, 14 March 2003. In: Hassan/Ray
2009 (374-377); “Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM): Proposal for Peace in Sudan
in General and Darfur in Particular”. In:
Hassan/Ray 2009 (378-380).
17
See for example El-Tom 2007 (227); Flint/
de Waal 2008 (14); Johnson 2003; Prunier
2005
(42).
Descriptions
of
Darfur’s
marginalization are found for e.g. in Prunier
2005 (25-33). However, it should be mentioned
that some voices claim that cultural oppression
occurred against non-Arabs in Darfur citing the
school curriculum and it’s presentation of
Darfur without history as proof (El-Tom 2009:
86).

15

Islamization has been a slow process related
to state formation. It was strengthened by the
first sultan of Darfur, Sulayman Solong (c.
1650-1680), who decreed Islam as the
sultanate's
official
religion.
Religious
conversions occurred on large scale under the
reign of Ahmad Bukr (c. 1700-1720) when
teachers were invited, mosques built, and his
subjects compelled to become Muslims.

30

In addition, other livelihood strategies like
trade, labor migration and remittances
supplement these livestock-rearing and
farming activities (Young et al 2005: viii; Young
et al 2009: 67-73). However, in Darfur the
connotation with camel or cattle herders is
always arab, and the connotation with arab is
nomad or herder. At least in the collective
memory of the Darfurians, it is the combination
of speaking the Arabic language exclusively,
following a nomadic lifestyle, and the
associated cultural elements that defines who
is an Arab in Darfur.
As far as the term “African” is concerned,
the Arabic translation ifriqi is not used in
Darfur. There is no emic term representing the
non-Arabs as a unit. The term that is used
currently in the dichotomy of Arabs and nonArabs is zurqa. It has existed in Darfur and
literally means “blue” (“black” in the Darfur
context), but there is nothing like a united body
of zurqa with a common phenotype, language,
history or culture. People keep stressing that
zurqa is not used widely, and is applied only in
a descriptive and neutral way. The current
application of the word is a recent
development; one theory of how it has come to
its current usage leads to Libya, where it is
used by Arab pastoralists to describe the nonArab Anakaza (camel pastoralists in Libya,
Chad and Sudan) in a pejorative way. The
derogative content of the term entered Darfur
with Ghadafi’s Pan-Arabist discourse from
Libya and Chad in the 1970s and has racist
connotations (Prunier 1992: 44, with reference
to Burr/Collins 1999: 84).

Arabized, but who are still perceived as nonArabs by most people in Darfur.18 In addition to
being the first language of many people in
Darfur, Arabic has also developed into a lingua
franca.
In Darfur, speaking the Arabic language
does not automatically translate into being
Arab. Language does not constitute the only
criterion for ethnic identification, and in many
cases may not even be an influential factor for
ethnic identity.19 Examples suggest that
occupation is a key criterion, and thus crossing
ethnic boundaries can be relatively simple.
Håland (1969) describes the situation of a
group of Fur cultivators who invested in cattle,
like their Bani Halba cattle-herding neighbors.
When this was more profitable than farming
they were obliged to cross the ethnic
categories. They became Bani Halba by
turning away from their earlier way of life and
language and by adopting the skills and culture
of the cattle herders, including the Arabic
language.20 Ethnic identity was transformed by
a shift in the social context; adapting to a new
livelihood, culture, language and ethnonym.
An examination of the emic terms applied to
pastoralists demonstrates that the combination
of language exclusivity and livelihood
constitutes key factors for the legitimacy of an
Arab identity in Darfur. The most common term
is ruhhal, “people who move”, without
differentiation between nomads, herders,
pastoralists, or agro-pastoralists. In addition to
ruhhal, simply arab is used as the epitome of
the authentic Arab nomad.21 Nowadays, being
a cultivator or a pastoralist is more an ideal
than a reality. A continuous shift from pure
pastoralism towards agro-pastoralism is
occurring, and cultivators also practice herding.

Local Conflict in Jabal Marra and Civil War
Dynamics
Generally the coexistence of around one
hundred ethnic groups and sub-groups prior to
the current conflict has been described as
harmonious, and in some parts of Darfur
intermarriage was commonplace. Although the
relationship between nomadic and sedentary
people
was
complementary,
tensions
frequently arose over the use of natural
resources; especially between cultivators and
pastoralists over water and grazing rights.22
Conflicts occurred and were resolved between
the different ethnic groups whereby no
reference was made to the category “Arab” or
“non-Arab”. A special customary system of
land tenure serves as an instrument for
regulating the coexistence of the groups in
Darfur. This system regulates the granting of

18

Examples include the Bargu-Silaihab, the
Qimr, and the Zaghawa-Um Kimmelte.
19
Interviews with people from Darfur,
Khartoum, 11/2007-04/2008; cf. Braukämper
1992 (241). Some groups try to claim an Arab
identity exactly by arguing that they only speak
Arabic, for example the Qimr and parts of the
Fallata. These groups usually try to support
their claims by factual or invented genealogies
that link them to Arab groups like the Ja’aliyn
(e.g. in the case of the Bargu-Silaihab and the
Qimr).
20
Abdul-Jalil (1979) shows another example
for changing ethnic identities of Fur and
Zaghawa.
21
In diverse interviews people just said arab
and meant for example Zaghawa or Rizaygat.
This equation is related to the vision of the
arab hurr, the free or noble horseman (cf.
Braukämper 1992 (163)).

22

Concerning traditional conflict and their
management see for example Mohamed/Badri
2005 (41-45 and 52-56).

31

land titles, i.e. estates, called hakura (plural
hawakir) by the pre-colonial rulers of Darfur.
The so-called administrative hakura grants
limited rights of taxation over people occupying
a certain territory, and is usually given to tribal
leaders. It is also known as dar (plural dur,
literally ”homeland”), thus dar Fur means that
the Fur have a communal leadership over a
defined territory (Abdul-Jalil 2006.) One
positive aspect of this system for the
coexistance of pastoralists and cultivators is
that the leaders of different ethnic groups and
sub-groups are encouraged to establish and
maintain alliances. Hence social relations
between leaders and residents of different dur
are encouraged, thus promoting peace and
security. However, the dar-system was
simultaneously the origin of the vulnerability of
the pastoralists without dar due to their
dependence on the land-owners for access to
natural resources (Abdul-Jalil 2006: 24-25;
Braukämper 1992: 219-220; Young et al 2005:
29; 45-46). It is important to note that while the
majority of the cattle-herding groups occupying
southern Darfur have their own dar, the camelherding groups in the northern parts of Darfur
do not (Young et al 2009: 40).23

point at around 3,000 metres. It lies in the
middle belt of the Darfur region where semifertile sands are characteristic. This area of
settled peasants is the geographical and
historical centre of Darfur. Here, markets were
the
meeting-place
for
wide-ranging
transactions between cultivators, nomads, and
travelling traders (O’Fahey 2008: 2, 33-36 and
241-242).
The Jabal Marra area is part of the dar of
the Fur, thus the leadership of the Fur
regulates the access to land and resources in
this region. The Fur had intermarried with
different ethnic groups, including Arabs. Some
of the previously Arab groups have given up
the Arabic language, adapted themselves to
the social and cultural surrounding, and are
now considered to be Fur.24 There are also
historical relations between the Fur and Arab
agro-pastoralist groups living in the marginal
areas of the Jabal Marra plateau.25
Furthermore, seasonal migrations of Arab
cattle and camel herders lead through the
Jabal Marra area, mainly those of the northern
Rizayqat.26
In Jabal Marra historical events have
influenced the establishment of the two blocs
currently known as Arab pastoralists and nonArab
cultivators.
These
historical
developments do not only explain the rigid
tightening of social boundaries, but also why
the two blocks eventually clashed and
experienced a formerly unknown violence.
Nowadays, the Darfurians perceive a major
difference
between
the
Arab
groups
traditionally living in their social surrounding,
and groups who have migrated to Darfur more
recently, particularly since the 1980s. In 1984
recurrent droughts resulted in a severe and
widespread famine, pushing both cultivators

The current civil war has deeply disturbed the
largely peaceful social interaction in Darfur. For
large parts of the population in Darfur the
social reality of the time before the war has
gone forever. The people I have interviewed
talk about that time like a lost paradise. I
interpret this nostalgic memory shaped by the
current experience of destruction and loss. The
past is described as “normal”; people say: “we
had everything”, “we had no problems”, and “if
problems occurred, we solved them.” Normality
implies order and stability; where one knows
how the world functions. People don’t refer to
the present situation as “the war” or “the
conflict”. They simply say al-mushkila or almashakil (problem or problems). This appears
to be a humble word for the realities in Darfur,
but in contrast with “the normality” of the prewar era it describes the deep disturbance they
have experienced; now everything is vague,
and reality cannot be taken for granted.

24

An example for this category are the
Jawama; Arab cultivators from Kordofan. A
famous member of this group is the Sudan
Liberation Movement (SLM) leader Abdelwahid
Mohamad al-Nur.
25
Examples are the ‘Utriya, the Hutiya, the
Ta’alba, Bani Mansur, the Tarjam, and the
Mahadi.
26
Interviews with people from Darfur,
Khartoum, 11/2007-04/2008.
The northern Rizayqat are traditionally camel
herders, the southern Rizayqat cattle herders.
They have three branches in common: the
Mahriyya, Nuwayba and Mahamid. The Irayqat
and Itayfat are camel herders. The southern
Rizayqat are united under one native
administration. The northern Rizayqat are
found separately under their individual native
administrations (Young et al 2009: 29-30).

The example of Jabal Marra demonstrates
some of the dynamics between the involved
groups. Jabal Marra is a mountainous area of
volcanic origin, with a cooler micro-climate
than the surrounding plains and the highest
23

Dar-holders in southern Darfur are for
example the southern Rizayqat, Habbaniya,
Ta’isha and Bani Halba. See Young et al
(2005: 119-120) for examples of groups having
a dar.

32

resources in an exaggerated way, and that
new settlements had been built on their
traditional migration routes. The expression
zaraib al-hawa (lit. enclosures of air) is used by
pastoralists to accuse the Fur and other
cultivators of blocking off unused land in order
to hinder the free access of the pastoralists’
cattle (Young et al 2009: 59-60; Prunier 2005:
xix). They claimed that the Fur would
deliberately cause them problems. According
to the argument of the herders, the Fur could
have been much more generous in their
hospitality without losing too much. A
counterargument by the cultivators was that
the demographic pressure of people and
animals was too intense for the available
resources. However, the capacity of the
farming land could have been maximized
through better management and development
projects. In addition, the pressure for new
pastures could have been limited by
convincing the herders to keep smaller
numbers of animals rather than very big herds.
Then these problems could perhaps have been
resolved at an earlier stage. However, none of
these interventions occurred and the area was
left to solve the problems on their own. Thus, a
root cause of the conflict was the neglect of
sustainable development in the area.28 Another
issue concerns the Arab groups who have
lived for generations among the Fur. In this
atmosphere of competition and fear, their Arab
roots may potentially become significant
markers of identity and exclusion. They live in
fear,
and
some
actually
experience
maltreatment,
robbery,
murder,
and
expulsion.29

and camel and cattle herders from northern
and western Darfur and from north-eastern
Chad further south, into the fertile Jabal Marra,
stimulating violent conflicts over water and
grazing lands between the Fur cultivators and
several pastoralist groups. Most of the herders
stemmed from Arab groups, although some
were members of the non-Arab Zaghawa.
Between 1986 and 1989 violent conflicts
intensified as the Fur were confronted by a
broad coalition of twenty seven different Arab
groups composed of cattle and camel herders
from the margins of the Jabal Marra plateau
and northern Rizayqat camel herders
respectively. The intensification of violence and
the collective organisation of these Arab
groups correlated with a change in their
strategies and aims. One result was an
intensification of attacks by Arab herders on
Fur cultivators.
Recurrent droughts and scarce resources
were common problems leading to conflicts in
Darfur, and methods of conflict management
had been developed to mitigate violent
escalations. Neither the droughts nor the
attacks were therefore surprisingly new in this
context. However, between the mid-1980s and
the early 1990s, several governmental
authorities were involved in attempts at conflict
management in Darfur, but instead of solving
problems their biased attitude in favour of the
Arab groups brought the conflicts to another
level. The former conflict units were the qabail
(plural of qabila), the ethnic groups or tribes,
but now the categories “Arab” and “non-Arabs”
were introduced. The government became a
stakeholder in the tribal conflicts and
contributed significantly to the shift from
smaller-scale violent conflicts to a fully-fledge
civil war with unprecedented levels of violence.

In the Arabs’ search for allies to support
their interests, the government was an obvious
choice. The government promised Arab
herders land and own native administrations,
and thus potential political power. From the
perspective of the government, this was not a
method for the unification of “the Arabs” of the
centre with “the Arabs” of Darfur. The stress on
the common Arab identity was merely a
superficial instrument for the creation of
stronger loyalties.

The Arab groups in Jabal Marra and at its
margins sought the support of the government,
or answered calls from the government to
mobilise and fight against the Fur. Newcomers
to the region usually do not possess any land.
Furthermore, their chances of becoming
integrated in the native administration of the
dar of the Fur - at least to a certain extent - are
diminished due to the pre-existing tensions.
Another issue concerns the ongoing rejection
of the demands of the Arab groups to share
power in their local native administration
system by the Fur in Jabal Marra.27 Since the
1980s Arab herders noticed a worsened
reception when they entered the land of the
Fur. The herders complained that the Fur
refused them access to land and water

28

Interview with a Darfurian ex-politician,
03/2009, Khartoum. The conflict aggravated
the situation of the pastoralists drastically. The
access to grazing reserves was restricted
because traditional livestock migration routes
were not usable. In addition, the internal and
external livestock collapsed (Young et al 2005:
xi and 70-82).
29
Interview with a Bani Halba member living
since generations in Jabal Marra, 03/2008,
Khartoum.

27

Several interviews with Darfurians, 11/200703/2009, Khartoum.

33

The non-Arab groups, the Fur in the case of
Jabal Marra, complained that their interests
were being ignored and that the government
was biased in favour of the Arab groups.30
Among the complaints of the Fur were that
Arab herders ignored the established animal
migration routes. In addition, the Fur protested
that newcomers were not yet integrated in the
administrative system and thus could not be
punished for these infringements. Furthermore,
when Arab groups lived within the Fur estates
and
were
included
in
their
native
administration, they refused to respect the Fur
customs. Another point of criticism was the
arrival of transnational migrants, mainly from
Chad, whose settlement in Darfur was
protected by some other Arab tribes which led
to a perceived imbalance of power.31
The frequent attacks by the herders, their
support
from
consecutive
Sudanese
governments, and the ideology of Arab – nonArab differences spread into Darfur and raised
fears among the Fur that their interests are
being ignored for the benefit of the Arab
groups. Many Fur feared that their land and
power would be transferred to Arab groups,
especially because the political regime
promised Arabs land as a reward for their
support.32 Simultaneously an awarenessraising campaign was promoted amongst the
forerunners of the current rebels, spreading
messages that the Fur were not just one ethnic
group, but resembled a nation and, as the
authentic and original inhabitants, were the
real rulers of Darfur. The Fur now started to
mobilize and to build up an armed movement
in Jabal Marra. By 1997, the entire region was
mobilized.33
After 2003, more factors influenced the Fur
in the Jabal Marra area siding with the armed
rebellion. First, the majority of the older
generation, who were initially against an armed
rebellion, started to support it in opposition to
the government, who collectively labelled Fur
as bandits in an attempt to devalue the
insurgency as criminality. In the long run,

however, the government could not continue to
deny the existence of an insurgency.34
Second, the Fur were influenced by the
broader context of the insurgency in the region
of Darfur. Other non-Arab groups, e.g. the
Zaghawa, as well as the SPLM, members of
the elite, and the diaspora mobilized them to
support an insurgency against the centre.
Hence there was a shift from local interests to
a national framework.
The Emergence of New Identities and their
Role in the Darfur Conflict
The terms Arab and (Black) African or arab
and zurqa are the product of recent social and
political constructions. Nowadays, they are
political identities which are valid in the context
of the violent actions of these warring groups.
The current meaning of zurqa has emerged in
contrast to arab as a term for all non-Arab
groups in Darfur, in the context of the
polarization of identities and most sharply in
the context of the current civil war. It is a new,
politically loaded term, used derogatively to
describe the other in opposition to the progovernment forces. It is thus an ascription by
others and not used as self-description in
terms of cultural identity. Meanwhile, “Arab”
has been equated with "perpetrator" and with
janjawid in Darfur. This becomes visible for
example through the fact that the Tama, a nonArab group, are sometimes called „new Arabs“,
because some of them are recruited by the
government militia. Here the term “Arab” has
no connection to a descent group. Both terms,
arab and zurqa, are highly emotionally loaded
and embody hatred and fear for the respective
opposition.
Another example of how the dichotomy
between Arabs and Africans is becoming more
powerful in the contemporary social reality is
the way in which some young, urban, non-Arab
Darfurians use the term zurqa to connect
themselves with a pan-African discourse; in the
sense of “being proud to be black”. This selfimage is an outcome of the conflict, and
correlates with a sense of purity. On one
occasion, a Darfurian Arab political scientist
and politician hinted at the Arab background of
the Keira-Fur sultanate. A young Fur accused
him of denying the strength and purity of the
Fur identity.35 A dual identity with Fur and Arab

30

Young et al (2005: 26) mention 16 drought
years since 1972. See for example Abdul-Jalil
2006 (29-30); Abdul-Jalil 2009 (334); Khalid
2009 (41).
31
See for example “The people committee for
peace and development. Kas [a town in Darfur;
R.P.] conference for peace and co-existence,
20-23 January 2003” (unpublished document).
32
See for example International Crisis Group
2007 (11) for cases where land and new
localities were given to Arab groups.
33
Concerning the beginning of the Fur
resistance see for example Flint/ de Waal 2008
(75-77).

34

See for example Assal 2009 (288-289) for a
description of the government’s presentation of
the conflict.
35
I witnessed this for example in a discussion
after a presentation of Dr. Walid Madibbo at AlKhatim Adlan Center for Enlightment and
Human Development, 03/03/2009, Khartoum.

34

vulnerable situation. The use of violence can
be seen as a coping strategy (Young et al
2005: 45; Young et al 2009) where access to
land is a core promise from the government in
exchange for military support. In Darfur, land is
not only valuable for farming or herding, but
also provides access to political power in local
administrations. Thus, a second root cause lies
in the specific land laws of Darfur which do not
provide every citizen with the same rights of
access. Third, there is a severe lack of good
governance in Darfur, which is used as a
playground for power games of the centre.
Playing the “identity card” as a divide-and-rule
strategy weakens the whole region by making
the parties turn against each other. Some
groups are strengthened and used as
supporters while their opposition is weakened.
All this serves the hegemonic potentates in
order to consolidate their monopoly of power.38

elements seems no longer possible. In the
current climate, Fur are inevitably distinguished
from their new Arab opponents. Perhaps we
are witnessing the construction of a group
identification that will survive the current
context of violent conflict.
To my knowledge, not much research has
been conducted into the ways in which identity
categories have shaped the perception of the
reality of conflict in Darfur. One exception is
Hastrup’s text “Violating Darfur” (2008). His
main thesis is that the technology of violence
employed to control Darfur was a technology of
language. The perception of what is going on –
“the truth about Darfur” – is an echo of the
Khartoum government’s insertion of a racist
rhetoric, that is the introduction of the label
zurqa, for mobilizing the militia fighters on the
ground. Zurqa and other labels, including
janjawid, were also adopted by the
international community and are now powerful
categories in the definition of truth and justice.
These categories are also influential in the
context of the International Criminal Court
concerning Sudan.36 I propose to use the
polarizing terms zurqa and janjawid in a slightly
different way. Historically, the terms zurqa and
janjawid were not introduced by the central
government, but rather influenced by
discourses in Darfur itself, as well as in Chad
and Libya. Nevertheless, this polarization is not
contested by the Sudanese government, the
insurgents, civil society activists or the
international community.

Conclusion
Two levels of the conflict have been addressed
– the local level of the conflicts between
communities in Darfur and the national level of
the conflict between the insurgents of Darfur
and the central government.39 The local
conflicts and the civil war get connected
through the practice that local groups side
either with the government or with the
insurgents. The reason for siding with one or
the other is, as I have outlined in this article,
not because people share a joint identity as
either Arabs or Africans, but because the
respective national and local interests merge in
a complementary way. Exceptions to this
pattern can be explained by the fact that some
groups are not satisfied with their position in
their local social arena. The current civil war
gives them the chance to get protection or,
with governmental support, to secure a better
position in the native administration. Both the
sedentary and the pastoralist populations
suffer from the far-reaching effects of
underdevelopment
and
marginalization.
However, local imbalances do exist. Thus a
small or weak group looks for support and
chooses a strong partner (or accepts or
refuses to be recruited). The choice between

The current contents of the terms and the
perceptions as two opposed blocs of Arabs
and non-Arabs/ arab (or janjawid in the context
of Darfur) and zurqa are an outcome rather
than a cause of the conflict.37 Identity
constitutes one ideological aspect of this
complex conflict whereby identity markers are
used for mobilization of violence by political
elites at the centre as well as by the
insurgents. I identify the root causes that
underlie the conflict dynamics as follows: First,
the marginalization and underdevelopment of
Darfur as a whole and of the pastoralist groups
in particular. Having no dar and being ignored
by development efforts brought the camel
pastoralist northern Rizayqat in particular into a

38

For the calculations of the National
Congress Party see for example International
Crisis Group 2007 (8). An elaborate account of
different hypotheses to understand the
outbreak and continuation of wars in Sudan is
found in de Waal 2007.
39
In addition there is the regional level that is
not considered in this chapter. For the regional
dynamics, see for example International Crisis
Group 2007 (16-20) and Tubiana 2008.

36

Abdul-Jalil (2009) shows another example
for the way how categories used by the
international community work and are
remoulded at local level shows concerning the
model of power sharing within the DPA and its
translation to the local level of northern Darfur
(Abdul-Jalil 2009).
37
For more on identity in conflict situations see
Schlee 2004 and 2008.

35

the government and the insurgents is not made
arbitrarily, but is influenced by historical and
socio-political factors in the local context as the
example of Jabal Marra shows. In other areas
of Darfur, groups do not actively take part on
either side. This attitude can be explained by
understanding the fact that involvement in this
violence is not worth the benefits of being in
alliance with the government or the rebels.40
The situation in Sudan and Darfur is
complicated. The simplification of the conflict
into one between Arabs and Africans creates
confusion and ambivalence. Arabs from the
centre do not consider themselves to be the
same as the Arabs in Darfur, and vice versa.41
The same applies accordingly for the terms
“African” and zurqa, which do not carry the
same meaning in the north-south relation and
the centre-west relation. This confusion has
served as an instrument for manipulation, for
the benefit of the elites of both groups at the
centre, and the insurgents. Revealing some of
these confusions might support a better
understanding of the needs, motivations and
aims of the different actors involved in the
conflict, and its ongoing dynamics.

Schoolteachers in Conflict Management in
North Darfur. In: Hassan/ Ray (eds.), 322-335.

Bibliography:

Burr, J. Millard and Robert O. Collins (1999):
Africa’s Thirty Years of War: Libya, Chad and
the Sudan (1963-1993). Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.

Ahmed, Abdel Ghaffar M and Leif Manger
(eds.) (2006): Understanding the Crisis in
Darfur. Listening to Sudanese Voices. Bergen:
BRIC.
Assal,
Munzoul
(2009):
Locating
Responsibilities: National and International
Responses. In: Hassan/ Ray (eds.), 285-296.
Beshir, Mohamed Omer (1984): Ethnicity,
Regionalism and National Cohesion in the
Sudan. In: The Sudan. Ethnicity and National
Cohesion, Bayreuth African Studies Series, 1:
15-37.
Beswick, Stephanie (2006): Sudan’s Blood
Memory: The Legacy of War, Ethnicity, and
Slavery in Early South Sudan. Rochester:
University of Rochester Press.
Braukämper, Ulrich (1992): Migration und
ethnischer Wandel. Untersuchungen aus der
östlichen Sudanzone. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner
Verlag.

Abdul-Jalil, Musa Adam (1979): Relations
among the people of Dor, Northern Darfur,
Sudan, PhD thesis. University of Edinburgh
(unpublished).

de Waal, Alex (2007): Sudan: What Kind of
State? What Kind of Crisis? Crisis States
Research Centre, Occasional Papers, 2, April
2007,
http://www.crisisstates.com/Publications/op/op
2.htm, viewed on 08.01.2010.

Abdul-Jalil, Musa Adam (2006): Land Tenure,
Land Use and Inter-Ethnic Conflicts in Darfur.
In: Ahmed/ Manger (eds.), 20-32.
Abdul-Jalil, Musa Adam (2009): Power-Sharing
or Ethnic Polarization: The Role of

de Waal, Alex (2009): Who are the Darfurians?
Arab and African Identities, Violence and
External Engagement. In: Hasan/ Ray (eds.),
125-144.

40

The conditions are diverse and thus the
problems and interests accordingly so. Other
examples are found in Takana 2008 for south
Darfur, Young et al 2005 for west and north
Darfur, and Young et al 2009 for north Darfur.
41
Prunier uses „native Arabs“ or „tribal Arabs“
for Arabs from the east and west Sudan, and
“real Arabs” for the Arabs of the centre of
Sudan, while he puts all in quotation marks.
Although Prunier seems to be aware of this, I
argue that he does not go far enough as he
says for example: ”The ‘Arabs’ of Sudan are
not ‘Arabs’ by blood but semito-cushitic
culturally arabized Creoles” (Prunier 2005:
179, footnote 78) See also Mukhtar (2004),
Lesch (1998) and Sharkey (2008) for the
complexities of Arabization as a postcolonial
policy of national integration with the northern
riverine Arab identity as template.

El-Tom, Abdullahi Osman (2007): Growing Up
in Darfur, Sudan. Khartoum: Sudanese Studies
Center.
Flint, Julie (2008): Darfur. Rebel Arabs under
Sudan Assault, http://www.sudantribune.com,
2 Jan 2008, viewed on 05.08.2009.
Flint, Julie and Alex de Waal (2008): Darfur: A
New History of a Long War. London, New
York: Zed Books.
Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn and Kharyssa Rhodes
(eds.) (2004): Race and Identity in the Nile
Valley. Ancient and Modern Perspectives.
Trenton, Asmara: The Red Sea Press.

36

Håland,
Gunnar
(1969):
Economic
Determinants in Ethnic Processes. In: Barth,
Fredrik (ed.): Ethnic Groups and Boundaries.
The Social Organization of Culture Difference.
Long Grove, Ill.: Waveland Press, 58-73.

O’Brian, Jay (1998): Power and the Discourse
of Ethnicity in Sudan. In: Salih, Mohamed M.A
and John Markakis (eds.): Ethnicity and the
State in Eastern Africa. Uppsala: Nordiska
Afrikainstitutet, 62-71.

Hassan, Salah M. (2009): Naming the Conflict:
Darfur and the Crisis of Governance in Sudan.
In: Hassan/ Ray (eds.), 154-169.

O’Fahey, Rex Seán (1973): Slavery and the
Slave Trade in Dar Fur. In: The Journal of
African History, 14, 1: 29-43.

Hassan, Salah M. and Carina E. Ray (eds.)
(2009): Darfur and the Crisis of Governance in
Sudan. Ithaca, London: Cornell University
Press.

O’Fahey, Rex Seán (1980): State and Society
in Dar Fur. London: Hurst and Company.
O’Fahey, Rex Seán and Jérôme Tubiana n.d.:
Darfur. Historical and Contemporary Aspects.
http://www.smi.uib.no/darfur,
viewed
on
08.01.2010.

Hastrup, Anders (2008): Violating Darfur: The
Emergent
Truth
of
Categories.
In:
Mediterranean Politics, 13, 2: 195-212.

Prunier,
Gérard
(2005):
Darfur.
The
Ambiguous Genocide. Ithaca, New York:
Cornell University Press.

Idris, Amir H. (2005): Conflict and Politics of
Identity in Sudan. New York, Houndsmills:
Palgrave Macmillan.

“Quraysh 2”, translated by Abdullahi Osman
El-Tom, In: Hassan/Ray (eds.) (2009), 452.

International Crisis Group (2007): Darfur’s New
Security Reality. Africa Report 134, 26 Nov
2007, 134.

Salih, El Tijani Mustafa M. (2005): Al-sira’ alqabali fi dar fur. Asbabahu wa tada’iyatahu wa
‘ilajahu. Dirasa fi ‘ilm al-ijtima’, (in Arabic)
(“Tribal Conflict in Darfur. Its Causes,
Reflections and Solutions. A Study in
Sociology
and
Applied
Anthropology”).
Khartoum: Printing Press Corporation.

Johnson, Douglas H. 2003: The Root Causes
of Sudan’s Civil Wars. Oxford: James Currey.
Khalid, Mansour (2009): Darfur: A Problem
Within a Wider Problem. In: Hassan/Ray
(eds.), 35-42.
Lesch, Ann Mosely (1998): The Sudan.
Contested National Identities. Oxford: Indiana
University Press.

Schlee, Günther (2004): “Taking Sides and
Constructing Identities: Reflections on Conflict
Theory”.
In:
Journal
of
the
Royal
Anthropological Institute (N.S.), 10: 135-156.

Mamdani, Mahmood (2009): Saviors and
Survivors: Darfur, Politics, and the War on
Terror. New York: Pantheon.

Schlee, Günther (2008): How Enemies Are
Made: Towards a Theory of Ethnic and
Religious Conflicts. New York et al: Berghahn.

Marchal, Roland (2008): The Roots of the
Darfur Conflict and the Chadian Civil War. In:
Public Culture, 20: 429-436.

Sharkey, Heather J. (2008): “Arab Identity and
Ideology in Sudan: The Politics of Language,
Ethnicity, and Race”. In: African Affairs, 107:
21-43.

Mohamed, Adam Azzain and Balghis Y. Badri
(2005): Inter-Communal Conflict in Sudan.
Causes,
Resolution
Mechanisms
and
Transformation. A Case Study of the Darfur
Region. Omdurman: Afhad University for
Women.

Takana, Yousif (2008): “The Politics of Local
Boundaries and Conflict in Sudan. The South
Darfur Case”. Sudan Working Paper, 2.
Tubiana, Jérôme (2008): The Chad-Sudan
Proxy War and the Darfurization of Chad:
Myths and Reality. Geneva: Small Arms
Survey.
United Nations Security Council (2008): Report
of the Secretary-General on the Deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, 17 June 2008.

Mukhtar, Al-Baqir Al-Afif (2004): The Crisis of
Identity in Northern Sudan. The Dilemma of
Black People with a White Culture. In: FluehrLobban/Rhodes (eds.), 207-240.
Nachtigal, Gustav (1971): Sahara and Sudan,
Tome IV, Wadai and Darfur. London: C. Hurst
and Company.

37

Woodward, Peter (1990): Sudan 1898-1989.
The Unstable State. Boulder et al: Rienner
Publications.

Young, Helen; Osman, Abdal Monium; Abusin,
Ahmed Malik; Asher, Michael and Omer Egemi
(2009) (eds.): Livelihoods, Power and Choice:
The Vulnerability of the Northern Rizayqat,
Darfur, Sudan. Boston: Feinstein International
Center.

Young, Helen; Osman, Abdal Monium; Aklilu,
Yacob; Dale, Rebecca; Badri, Babiker and
Abdul Jabbar A. (2005) (eds.): Darfur –
Livelihoods Under Siege. Medford: Tufts
University.

38

What might have also contributed to my error
is the fact that after the 1974 war, many
Turkish Cypriots named their newborn children
Savash, while many others chose Barish. Both
names referred directly to the Turkish military
operation in Cyprus – seen as a peace
operation and the salvation of Turkish Cypriots.
Last but not least, my mistake could be linked
to the opposing visions of the two conflicting
parties: What Greek Cypriots call war, Turkish
Cypriots call peace. For Greek Cypriots, peace
is yet to come, whilst for Turkish Cypriots it has
been accomplished with war. Not surprisingly,
their antithetical perceptions, Greek Cypriots
aiming for justice and Turkish Cypriot for
recognition, are mirrored in their views on
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
This article takes the anthropologist’s
confusion about the continuities and ruptures
between conflict, post-conflict, and peace as a
point of departure to show that this particular
confusion frequently appears in current
approaches to conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. The absence of violence or
latent conflicts can easily be confused with
peace, whereas mechanisms of regulating
violence can be confused with conflict.
Arguably, a better distinction between, and
understanding of, conflict and peace could lead
the way towards a lasting peace. More
specifically, a clearer distinction between local
forms of violence and forms of regulating and
confining violence can benefit peace escalation
which I define as the process of enlargement
and intensification of peace relations through
switching scale levels.
Based on the results of a five-year comparative
study I conducted between 2001 and 2006 in
Potamia and in Pyla, two places where Greek
and Turkish Cypriots still live together after the
partition of the island in 1974, I argue that the
anthropologist’s approach to peace and conflict
grounded on fieldwork can provide new
perspectives on conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. Understanding conflict and
violence escalation in Cyprus in the past can
help construct the scale of peace escalation
today and in the future. This comparative study

Escalating
for
Peace
in
Cyprus: Roads to Peace
through Scales of Conflict
Barbara Karatsioli
Abstract
Based on the comparative analysis of the
dynamics of conflict and peace in Potamia and
Pyla, two sites of Greek and Turkish Cypriot
coexistence, this article advances the
necessity of a new reading of conflict
resolution for the case of Cyprus. Hereby, an
anthropologist’s
contribution
based
on
fieldwork can be fundamental. I propose a
different vision of the political and its scales
that can help to implement durable
peacebuilding on the local level. This
understanding of the political shows that the
achievement of sustainable peace does not
only depend on institutional transformation.
Successful peacebuilding needs to be
embedded in local forms of the political to
ensure that the escalation for peace can be
built on the same scales as the escalation of
conflict.
Introduction
During my fieldwork in Pyla, a buffer zone
village in Cyprus composed of Greek and
Turkish Cypriots, it became a habit to play with
the children in my neighbourhood. A little
Turkish Cypriot boy often came to my open
door, stand on the doorstep and wait for me to
notice him. “Savash,” I would say, “what are
you doing there, why don’t you come in?” He
always responded by approaching me on the
run. This banal scene repeated itself for
months until one day another boy asked me
why I kept calling my young neighbour Savash
when his name was, in fact, Barish.
Why indeed did I insist on calling the young
boy “War” (Savash) when his name was
“Peace” (Barish)? What made me confuse
peace with war? Was it because of Barish’s
particular situation in the village? That is, was it
because of the boy’s mainland-Turkey origin,
which clearly distinguished him – in terms of
language, clothes, playing habits, way of life –
and rendered his integration amongst Turkish
Cypriot boys in the village difficult? Barish was,
in many ways, the embodiment of the
undesired effects of the war for both Greek and
Turkish Cypriots1 (Hatay 2005 and 2007).

against the Turkish presence in Cyprus, be it
the Turk settlers, the presence of the Turkish
army, or the control of politics by the Turkish
government. The Turkish presence points to
the failed sovereignty that the Turkish Cypriots
had hoped to achieve with the Turkish military
intervention in Cyprus. Greek Cypriots
denounce this Turkish presence as an act of
colonisation that extends the Turkish military
occupation in the northern part of the island
and creates an additional problem to the
resolution of the conflict.

1

Turkish Cypriots – mainly left wing – have
developed since the 1980s a political discourse

39

of the political needs to be redefined to go
beyond the political sphere of the state.
In current conflict resolution and peacebuilding
efforts, this notion is generally linked to statebuilding: The state, the currently imagined
shelter for peace, needs to be built upon the
classical modernist model of democratic
representation to apply to and to integrate the
liberal world (Liden/ MacGinty/ Richmond
2009). In general, peace solutions tend to
recreate the state in the image of the state that
has failed. Problems of state breakdown are
thus paradoxically addressed by state
reconstruction
(Robinson
2007).
The
construction of peace is synonymous to
reinforcing the political sphere, the modernist
form of representation. In these terms, peace
plans recreate and reinforce previous power
positions – frequently the same actors – that
introduced and helped escalate the conflict.
They do so whether they focus on politics from
the “top” (reinforcing the political sphere) or
from “below” (reinforcing grassroots politics or
the traditional or administrative “leaderships”)
on local or national forms of representation.
But is this the best solution? Can conflict – and
its escalation – be contained this way? Or can
one escape the liberal and modernist frame of
the politics to implement peace through other
forms of the political?
I maintain that the practices of the political
are plural and not always state-referential. I
avoid associating political action with the state,
as doing so would avoid its essentialisation.
For the state is only one form of political
organisation of the society, dominant but not
eternal. The dissociation of the political and the
state can reveal forms of action and
organisation that extend beyond the temporal
and spatial limits of the state. In these terms,
the political encompasses both the state and
its political forms, not the contrary. Following
Clausewitz (1976), I argue that violence is
present in the political, subordinated to it, or in
other terms, its continuation by other means. I
sustain, arguing against Clausewitz, that
violence is not intrinsically related to the state
nor is political power measured through the
control of legitimate violence by the state. I
argue against Max Weber's definition of the
political as the domination of one group over
others for the purpose of organising society,
that the political does not necessarily show
relations of domination of one group over the
others. The political defines the relations
between groups and their organisation,
whether it be in terms of of representation or of
mobilisation, durable or only apparent at times
of conflict or peace, expressed in violent or
peaceful means, for the purpose of organising
society. The political can be traced from both

is not an effort to generalise the two cases as
models. Rather, it invites a more thorough
examination of the scale of mobilisation for
either conflict or peace. It aims to show that
changes in patterns of conflictual and peaceful
relations as well as patterns of regulation on a
small scale can contribute to the conception of
peace plans.
The aim of the article remains modest. It does
not intend to provide new propositions for
international interventions on national conflicts,
but simply to discuss the problems that the
misconceptions of peace and conflict engender
for peace resolutions. It sustains that a new
understanding of the political and its scales,
starting at the local, can reveal the actual
problems in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The term “peacebuilding”, introduced in peace
politics by UN Secretary General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali with the “Agenda for Peace”
(1992), refers to the processual character of
establishing peace. It is used here mainly to
address the efforts of local and international
political actors (states, political groups,
international organisations) for an institutional
transformation to help build sustainable peace.
The term also refers to the capacity building of
non-governmental organisations to obtain
peace. “Peacekeeping” is the particular
operation that aims to keep conflict parties at
arm’s-length and to mak sure that ceasefires
and treaties are respected. Progressively, as I
redefine the political, I show that peacebuilding
should extend to encompass more local forms
of the political.
The article is organised in three parts. The first
discusses
the
cognitive
displacements
fundamental to this perspective: The “political”
and its “scales”. The second presents general
information on the conflict and conflict
resolution in Cyprus and delves into the two
case studies. The third discusses the
significance of the political as it appears in
these case studies for peacebuilding in
Cyprus.
Cognitive Displacements: The Political and
its Scales
Following Chandler (2005), I maintain that
peacebuilding should rely on the “political”.
Like Lederach (1998), I argue that
peacebuilding retains a narrow technical focus
on political transformation. Peacebuilders
argue that they penetrate society. I sustain
they penetrate only the political and public
sphere. Whereas Lederach emphasises the
necessity of a larger web of relations for
reconciliation, I sustain – based on my
personal fieldwork in Cyprus – that the notion

40

the top and below, and it is always multireferential. The political is not expressed or
controlled by one group: It is expressed in
different locations that I call “locations of the
political” (lieux du politique, Abèles 1996)2 and
builds upon different networks (Tilly 1978).
Understanding the plurality of the specific and
unique “locations of the political” is, I helpful for
an understanding of the escalation of conflict
and the quest for new ways of implementing
lasting peace as these locations reveal
particular forms of politics and political
organisation that can contribute to both peace
and conflict.
The cognitive displacement of the political also
demands a new definition of the notion of the
“local”. I propose that the local should not only
be seen as the smallest scale of representation
and always in relation to the political sphere of
the state. Rather, it should be disconnected
from the idea of place as an administrative unit
or as the lowest scale of group representation.
The local represents above all the smallest
scale for structural organisation and for
mobilisation. Thus it refers to the fundamental
mobilising and de-mobilising units, that is to
the process of organisation, containment and
regulation of collective action and forms of
violence. Following Grossetti (2006), a scale is
defined by three dimensions - mass (the
aspect of social phenomena that is the number
of the unities of action they implicate),
generality (context, defined by the different
levels of the mass) and time (duration, a
composite of action). The change in these
three dimensions indicates the change of
scale, hence the escalation of peace and
conflict. For the purposes of this article, I only
consider the local in terms of the organisation
of mobilisation and will discuss the escalation
of conflict on the local scale.
Since it is dissociated from the administrative,
the local can extend to bigger or smaller
territorial or collective units. The local is the
smaller scale of the organisation of collective
action, whether this refers to a region, a
village, or a transnational group. It is also the
first scale of the containment of violence and
should thus be taken into account in the
resolution of conflict and peacebuilding. Thus,
my analysis should contribute to the
understanding of collective action. More
specifically, the changes in conflict and peace
relations at local levels and the subsequent
forms of regulation illustrate alternative scales

– and mechanisms to reinforce or weaken – to
implement peace.
Patterns of Peace and Conflict in Cyprus
In 1990 the Republic of Cyprus, representing
the Greek Cypriot population, applied for
integration into the European Community. One
reason for this application was a new
perspective on the resolution of the Cyprus
conflict, a failed subject of negotiations since
1963 (Diez 2002, Ker-Lindsay 2005, Tocci
2004), in the framework of a larger Europe.
The conflict, which set Greek and Turkish
Cypriots against each other, has been violent
since 1958 when Cyprus was still a British
colony (Holland 1993-1994). Although the
constitution of the Republic of Cyprus was
highly praised in 1960 as the best example of a
“bi-communal” state (Crawshaw 1960, WestonMarkides 2001) it took only three years for the
republic to break down. In 1963, a
constitutional crisis led to the emergence of
violence across the island and the retreat of
the Turkish Cypriot community from the
republic (Kyriakides 1968; Markides 1977)3.
Violence spread throughout Cyprus, leading to
the displacement of the Turkish Cypriots from
mixed areas and the reinforcement of enclaves
in the capital, Nicosia (Drousiotis: 2005).
These enclaves were divided from the rest of
the city by the so-called Green Line. UNFICYP
(United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus), a peacekeeping force was created
and dispatched and has been present in
Cyprus ever since (Mirbagheri 1998). It was
not until 1968, after being urged to do so by
their authorities, that Turkish Cypriots started
to return to their villages. This return was
linked to the start of negotiations between the
two sides (1968-1973), but not to a return of
the Turkish Cypriot community to political
coexistence in the Republic of Cyprus.
In 1974 after a coup organized by the Greek
military government and Greek Cypriots, the
Turkish army invaded Cyprus to protect the
Turkish Cypriot community (Crawford 2006)4.
3

The constitutional crisis was provoked by the
proposal for the “13 amendments” of the
constitution proposed by President of Cyprus
Archbishop
Makarios
in
1963.
The
administrative and constitutional reforms
proposed were in favour of the Greek Cypriot
community. The Turkish Cypriots responded
by retiring from the government.
4
The Republic of Cyprus is what James
Crawford has called an internationalised state:
The Treaty of Garanty of the Constitution
signed in 1960 acknowledges the right of
Turkey, Greece and England to intervene in

2

My use of the notion “lieu du politique” differs
from that proposed by Abèles in that I consider
that these “political localities” are not
necessarily in the “places of the state”.

41

The war ended with the partition of Cyprus and
the displacement and separation of the two
communities. The Green Line, stretching from
the east to the west coast of the island, has
separated the Greek Cypriots in the south from
Turkish Cypriots in the north ever since. The
partition created by the Turkish invasion was
reinforced by the constant presence of the
Turkish army in the north of Cyprus. The
Republic of Cyprus continues to function and is
recognized internationally as a republic
representing the Greek Cypriot community.
The self-declared “Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus” in 1984 in the northern part
of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus has
no such international recognition.
Following the partition, the only interaction
between the two communities took place at the
UN negotiating table. There was no other
contact between the two parts of Cyprus. Pyla
and Potamia are among the few places where
coexistence was not disrupted. Potamia now
lies in the territory under the control of the
Republic of Cyprus; Pyla is situated in the
buffer zone supervised by the United Nations.
The Cyprus conflict has seen a number of
peace plans since 1963, including the four
resolutions
of
the
Makarios-Denktash
negotiations of 1977. At this time, the two
parties agreed amongst other things on an
independent, nonaligned, bi-communal federal
republic, the freedom of movement and
settlement, and a central government. The
failures since then are usually linked to the two
parties’ politics: The Greek Cypriots’ demand
for justice set against the Turkish Cypriots’
demand for recognition (Bahcheli 2004, Bryant
2001).
After numerous failed opportunities, peace
plans proposed for Cyprus after 1977 revolve
around the same guidelines. They become
technocratic, “consociational,” overly detailed,
and leave little room for failure in the political
sphere. Since the 1990s, along with
propositions for conflict resolution, the plans
have integrated propositions for peacebuilding.
Peace plans have sought complex methods of
conflict resolution and peacebuilding and tight
control of the political by reinforced
consociationalism, that is, power-sharing or
power-division between the two communities in
the state. In this form of government, the rule
belongs to the elites, but I argue that this
complexity of the political scale aids the

breakdown of the constitution and the
mobilisation of the population.
Since the 1990s, the international community
has encouraged civil society initiatives for
peace and the construction of bridges between
the two communities (Cockburn 2004). Efforts
at rapprochement, the political movement
which aimed to help establish peace from
below through contact and communication
between the two communities, are praised by
international organisations, but find little real
support in Cyprus. The Turkish Cypriot leaders’
unilateral decision to allow the free circulation
of Cypriots in both parts of Cyprus was a first
step towards re-establishing contact, but it did
not serve as a catalyst for peace. Although
inter-communal business has begun to grow,
the same is not true for the rapprochement
movement. In fact, little has been done by local
authorities to build peace.
What mechanisms can prevent this conflict
mobilisation and establish peacebuilding? Can
a focus on other political scales help establish
peace? I point here to a smaller scale, to
politics from below, as a solution.
Pyla: Where Peace is delocalised Conflict
Many studies on violent conflict focus on
territorial forms of violence and group violence
(Bax 2000) but seldom try to understand the
“territorial absence” of violence. This
contributes to the creation and perpetuation of
a double misconception concerning the
“peacefulness” of the territories in question.
First, the absence of violence is interpreted as
the absence of conflict. Second, the
“peacefulness” of its inhabitants is understood
as if they would not engage in violence outside
the village. I demonstrate that the absence of
violence at a particular locality can entail the
“delocalisation” of violence. Further, the
conflict, while delocalised in a violent form, can
be present in other forms in that particular
locality. The study of this phenomenon is a first
step to apprehending other forms of the
political and how they contribute to the failure
of peacebuilding in particular sites.
The study of the scales of conflict and its
regulation amongst the inhabitants of Pyla can
contribute significantly to this discussion5. Its
Greek and Turkish Cypriot inhabitants both
promote a peaceful image of their village. They
apply this image not only to the period
beginning after the war when the village,
caught up between two armies and composed
of a mixed population, was turned into a buffer
zone. They claim that Pyla has always been

the internal affairs of Cyprus. This is possible
only after agreement between the three
countries and not by one country alone, as was
the case of the Turkish military intervention in
1974.

5

On Pyla see also the anthropological work of
Yiannis Papadakis (1997, 2000).

42

They feel the need for revenge. Nevertheless,
they confine violence to the exterior of the
village, fearing acts of revenge inside the
community. This delocalisation of violence
helps to preserve a apparently peaceful site,
while at the same time it contributes to the
escalation of conflict in other locations.
Also in 1974, at the time of the Greek coup and
the Turkish military invasion, the inhabitants
fought outside the village. At that time, the
situation in Pyla was tense with guns shown
and threats made. First, the Greek Cypriots
tried to control the village during the five days
of the coup, July 15–July 20. The Turkish
military invasion reversed the situation, with
the Turkish Cypriots trying to control the
village. It was not until the Turkish army
approached Pyla that the inhabitants decided
to cooperate to keep all “strangers”, the
Turkish army and Greek Cypriot refugees
alike, outside the village’s boundaries. They
united in force to preserve the village as a
peace sanctum and to maintain power
relations between the two communities.
In 1996, 22 years after the partition of the
island and the separation of the two
communities, villagers found themselves facing
each other in violent opposition on the Green
Line of Dekelia. Greek Cypriots from Pyla
joined a biker rally on the southern side of the
Green Line. This rally aimed, like many others
after the partition, to prove by crossing the
Green Line that Cyprus could not be divided
and that the Republic of Cyprus was sovereign
over the entire island. Meanwhile, the Turkish
army, extreme right-wing organisations, Turks,
and Turkish Cypriots were in place to stop the
crossing and to remind Greek Cypriots that the
northern part of Cyprus was an independent
republic. This was one of the few events where
Greek and Turkish Cypriots from Pyla came
face to face with violence. Greek Cypriots who
tried to cross the lines were killed by Turks.
The injury of a Greek Cypriot woman from Pyla
could not be seen in the same way as past
practices of violence towards strangers outside
the village – it was a matter that had to be
resolved inside the village. The Turkish
Cypriots responded by “encouraging” a Turkish
resident who participated in the violent events
to leave the village.
Returning to my main argument, the study of
the absence of violence reveals interesting
local political practices. The apparent
peacefulness in the village depends on two
forms of regulation: On the one hand, the
practice of negotiations and reciprocity inside
the village and on the other hand, the
delocalisation of violence. The peacefulness is,
in fact, conflict in disguise – latent protracted

peaceful, with no sign of inter-communal
violence
inside
the
community.
The
peacefulness of the village, they say, is not a
result of the UN peacekeepers´ presence or
the village’s character as a buffer zone. It is,
rather, a structural characteristic of the
relations in the village. Studies depicting
violence territorially during the period of intercommunal troubles confirm the villagers’
contention (Patrick 1976). It appears indeed
that the village is peaceful. This does not imply
that precautions against violence were never
taken. As in other parts of Cyprus, houses
were prepared to serve as fortresses, and
there were tensions, especially during the
periods of inter-communal fighting and war, but
they simply did not give way to a violent
outbreak.
Interactions inside the village have always had
a bi-communal flavour, reinforced by a
mechanism of strict reciprocity between the
two communities. Villagers keep and have
always kept separate coffee-shops, churches
or minarets, mayors and councils, and since
1974, their own flags, Greek and Turkish. The
dynamics of conflict are certainly present.
Tensions arise regarding the celebration of
festivities in the village square, the flags, and
the uses of public spaces. But when tensions
rise locally, the inhabitants tend to resolve
problems through negotiations. Reciprocity is
always used as a means to resolve issues and
preserve peaceful relations. From the
beginning of the conflict, to the division of
Cyprus, and up to today, the communities
cooperate in money-making enterprises.
The village has always been a “peace
sanctum.” The inhabitants have never allowed
violence inside the village and have always
prevented attacks. Interestingly, the inhabitants
of Pyla practise violence – but only outside the
village. In 1963-1964, when intense intercommunal fighting took place in Cyprus, the
inhabitants of Pyla were very active in the
violence. Turkish Cypriots from Pyla organised
in groups and headed to the north where they
joined to protect Turkish Cypriots or to fight
Greek Cypriots in mixed villages. For their part,
some Greek Cypriots headed south to fight in
the neighbouring villages or in the city of
Larnaca.
During that period, both Greek and Turkish
Cypriots participated in and even initiated
violence in other villages. Their actions are no
secret. On the contrary, they speak openly to
fellow villagers about the murders, rapes, and
other violent acts they committed. Appalled by
each other’s participation in violence, villagers
always spoke to me of the growing hatred that
they always tried to suppress against the other.

43

Before the conflict, one could hardly distinguish
Greek from Turkish Cypriots in their everyday
practises. They worked together, frequented
the same coffee shops, intermarried, and
participated together in political movements.
The conflict brought a radical change within the
local relations.
Violence started in 1958 with ambushes on
members of TMT and EOKA.6 According to my
informants, this was the first form of violence
between members of the two communities. In
the beginning, Greek or Turkish Cypriots from
Potamia and surrounding villages met in group
and waited for their victims, usually members
of the EOKA or the TMT, at night. Murders or
massacres, as they are called by the
inhabitants, were always committed outside
the villages. In the second phase, which
started with the constitutional crisis of 1963,
violence also burst out inside the communities.
The fights did not only involve the inhabitants
of Potamia; the site of violence was the region,
a compound of five villages. When violence
started in Potamia, inhabitants of neighbouring
villages joined in immediately to reinforce their
larger community. Villagers also initiated
violence or performed acts of vengeance in
other villages. The division into two
communities, as well as the violent outbreaks,
happened at the regional level. Violence
implicated the inhabitants of all villages, but the
site of violence shifted from one village to
another quite rapidly. It is also significant that
violence was not always based on national
opposition – it became a means to settle
interpersonal disputes.
In all the villages, the inhabitants controlled the
entryways from their houses, observed each
other’s movements, and waited behind closed
windows to start firing. The spread of violence
was rapid in the region. Turkish Cypriots began
to flee, some finding refuge with the Turkish
army stationed in the nearby village of
Lurujina, or in the city enclaves. When the
UNFICYP was created, the peacekeepers
helped to evacuate most of the remaining
Turkish Cypriots to Lurujina. The region was
one of the most important sites of intercommunal fighting during that period (Patrick
1976). The displaced Turkish Cypriots of the

conflict on the scale of the village and violent
conflict outside the village.
How can peace interventions be successful in
this community? The study of the practices of
conflict inside and outside the village shows
that conflict is managed locally by
delocalisation
of
violence.
Egalitarian
reciprocal
relations
between
the
two
communities tend to confine tensions inside
the village. UNFICYP supervision of the village
and its integration in the buffer zone after 1974
does not contribute to peacekeeping between
the two communities locally, nor does it
prevent the inhabitants from confrontations
outside the village as the events of 1996 have
shown. Their presence in the village is rather
focussed on larger peacekeeping efforts
between the two parts of the divided island and
the two armies of Cyprus.
Can peacebuilding prove locally more effective
than peacekeeping? Through UNDP-funded
projects, the UN assists, mainly the
development of cooperation between the two
communities. At the same time, there appear
to be no local initiatives to promote peace
inside the community or to use the bicommunal character of the village to advocate
peace, even though bi-communal groups
promoting rapprochement chose the village as
a meeting point for their activities. Pyla is also
the only location in the buffer zone, (and of
entire Cyprus) that is accessible for both
Greeks and Turkish Cypriots. The choice of the
village by the bi-communal groups is thus due
to its particular geographical and political
situation. The bi-communal character of the
village comes in second, even though it is
often used as a proof of the possibility of
peaceful coexistence. Since the first meetings
in the 1990s, rapprochement partisans have
urged the inhabitants of Pyla to participate,
share their experience of peace, and help to
extend the peaceful relations on Pyla to the
entire island, but they have not managed to
mobilise the inhabitants. In fact, there is little to
no participation of the village’s Greek and
Turkish Cypriots in the promotion of bicommunal activities.
To conclude, it appears that the mechanisms
of conflict regulation developed locally in Pyla
are too strong to allow peacekeeping or
peacebuilding interventions from outside to
transform local relations structured around
deep-rooted conflict. They cannot be easily
changed, neither through politics of peace nor
through politics of conflict.

6

EOKA, Greek for the National Organisation of
Cypriot Fighters, was a Greek Cypriot national
military resistance organisation created in
1955. It fought against the British rule in the
island and for the union of Cyprus with Greece.
TMT, Turkish Resistance Organisation, was a
Turkish Cypriot military organisation, created in
1958. Its aim was to defend Turkish Cypriot
rights against EOKA demands for Cyprus’
union with Greece.

Potamia: From Conflict to Peace
Relations between Greek and Turkish Cypriots
in Potamia are different from those in Pyla.

44

region did not return until 1968 upon the urging
of their leaders.
Violence began again in 1974 with the Greek
military coup and the Turkish invasion. The
same networks were used as before, and
violence expanded again at the regional level.
At the end of the war, Potamia remained under
the control of the Republic of Cyprus. Of the
five villages in the region, only Pirroyi came
under Turkish control. All its Greek Cypriot
inhabitants fled to the territory controlled by the
Republic of Cyprus. Some came to live in
Potamia, others in Nicosia, while the majority
united in Dali, the biggest village of the region.
The Turkish Cypriots who found themselves in
Potamia after the partition managed to reach
the northern part of the island. Few Turkish
Cypriots stayed after 1974. Some came back
one or two years later along with others who
had migrated to England in the 1960s; some
started to leave northern Cyprus and to return
to the village after the 1990s, but the Turkish
Cypriots, the majority in the village before the
war, constituted no more than five per cent of
the population.
By the end of the 1990s, Potamia, which had
so rapidly disintegrated into violence, joined
Dali, the neighbouring village, to initiate
rapprochement. The committees created to
organise the meeting with their former covillagers, of whom the majority was living in the
village of Akchayi7 after 1974, turned to the UN
for help. Communication by telephone or mail
between the two parts of Cyprus was difficult,
but the UN presence facilitated contact.
Meetings were arranged in Pergamos, a park
in the British Sovereign Base of Dekelia, a
territory that both communities could access.
Initially reluctant to engage in bi-communal
activities, the other villages of the region
followed suit when they saw the organisation’s
success. The change was radical: The network
stretched throughout the villages and the old
combatants felt remorse for their actions.
The changes in Potamia correspond to general
political tendencies. The villages seem open to
new political ideas, whether politics of conflict
or peace. The village has a high political party
participation. Many inhabitants have been
active in left-wing politics since the 1930s;
others have been involved in right-wing politics
since the 1950s. It is the latter who engaged in
conflict and violence from the late 1950s to
1974, even though both left-wing and rightwing villagers participate in the current
rapprochement. Although party participation
can explain the change of ideas and the

spread of new political ideas locally, it does not
explain why this region participated in action so
quickly and massively. Nor does it explain the
scale of violence or the local politics, namely,
why a “movement” is both deployed and
contained at the level of the region.
Unlike Pyla, Potamia, along with the other
villages in the region, engaged in violence
locally. Neighbours suddenly turned into violent
enemies. Whereas Pyla preserved the
peacefulness of the village through the
delocalisation of violence, Potamia rendered
violence more intense and constant by
expanding violence throughout the region. By
constantly switching sites of violence, residents
had to be constantly ready to welcome
violence to their village or to participate in
violence nearby. The expansion of violence at
the level of the region accelerated and
intensified the phenomenon. The networks
deploying violence were confined to this
particular region, but for the violence to cease,
UN intervention was required. The violence
only came to a halt with the displacement of
Turkish Cypriots.
The case of Potamia is an excellent example
of the escalation of peace through the same
local networks, at the same scale, and
sometimes by the same people who engaged
in violence some 30 years earlier. The scale of
political mobilisation did not change throughout
the years, the region remaining the smallest
scale for the mobilisation of both conflict and
peace. When violence spread during the
1960s, the division into national communities
and the defence of one’s community on the
regional level was practically immediate. When
Dali decided to engage in rapprochement, it
immediately invited the villages of the region to
act in common, this time in the name of the
region, not the national community.
This brings me last, but not least, to a major
question which can help to understand the
meaning of the political and its scales in
Potamia more thoroughly. Why and how did
the region become the relevant level for the
organisation of political action? The answers
given to me by my informants were sometimes
quite confusing. Some commented that the
organisation of violence on the regional level
during the 1960s was a result of the
“naturalness” of defending one’s national
community outside one’s village. Others
claimed it had always been like that, and that
relations within the region were tight. Asked
about the organisation of the rapprochement
movement locally, my informants used the
same arguments, considering it “natural” that
the movement be extended to the level of the
region, since the relations were so close. They
referred to the past violent actions to argue

7

The village bore the name of Argaki before
the war. The location is thoroughly analysed in
the work of Peter Loizos (1975, 1981).

45

the articulation between local and national
forces of the political. Influenced by national
politics, it is shaped by local politics. In other
terms, the local is the smaller scale in which
the action is pertinent. The local is also the
limit-scale of a particular sense of the political
and of violence and of its mechanisms for
regulation.
The dichotomous cases of Potamia and Pyla
shed light on the organisation of networks
marking the specific scales of peace and
conflict. Pyla is an excellent example for the
continuities and ruptures between conflict,
post-conflict, and peace. The existence of what
is falsely regarded as “peace” in the village
depends on two practices to regulate tensions:
Negotiations to avoid escalation of conflict
inside the village and violence outside the
village. The first mechanism is practised
constantly both through the periods of peace,
of inter-communal violence (1963-1974), and
of protracted non-violent conflict (1974-). The
second mechanism, the delocalisation of
violence, is activated and re-activated in
periods of violence. These two mechanisms
show not only the politics of the regulation of
(non-)violence inside the village, but also the
politics violence outside the village. At this
level, the village is the scale of the conflict
contained. The structural relations of the
village's inhabitants can help to clarify these
practices of the political and to clarify
confusions about the continuities and ruptures
between conflict, post-conflict, and peace. I
sustain that identities are constructed in an
oppositional mode, the enmity being the
structural characteristic of a common local
identity. The relations between the members of
the two communities seem to have been, for at
least the last century, always inter-communal
and never inter-individual. It is enmity that
defines the relations between the inhabitants.
Negotiations and reciprocity are basic local
political processes allowing for enmity to be
expressed and regulated internally. They allow
for this enmity to be expressed in violent terms
only outside the village, and always at periods
of general mobilisation in accordance to
political changes in the relations between the
two communities. These practices, in and
outside the village, are difficult to change.
Peace is difficult to implement and to practice
following the steps to the escalation and of the
containment of conflict locally. The regulatory
mechanism that allows conflict to be contained
and avoided does not allow for peace to install.
As for Potamia, judging the fact that relations
have always been inter-individual and
intermarriage and change of religion have
always been possible, one would expect that
the conflict could not affect local relations. But

that if violence were deployed at this level so
should peace. The rapprochement movement
had to correct the mistakes of the past.
It was not until I started to analyse past
mobilisations that I understood how the region
had become the pertinent level of political
action. Even in the early 1920 and 1930s,
inhabitants engaged in the class struggle
locally, at the level of the region. The study of
this mobilisation has permitted me to see that
the century-long existence of a çiftlik, a feudal
private estate and a centre for work for the
surrounding villages as late as the 1940s, was
the main reason why the villages organised in
collective action. The economic and social life
of the inhabitants of this region revolved
around the çiftlik for centuries. The collapse of
the feudal economy (along with the collapse of
the Ottoman Empire) the rise of a capitalist
economy (along with British colonialism) gave
way to the first mobilisations of the inhabitants
on a regional level. The aims of political action
may change from politics of conflict to politics
of peace, but action is always deployed on a
regional level. Interpersonal relations facilitate
ever-changing
group
identifications
(as
enemies or as friends, as national or social
enemies, etc).
Once conflict arises, it can escalate and divide
the region very easily. Peacekeeping was
necessary in 1963, as no mechanisms of
regulation seemed to exist. But has it been
successful? To stop violence, it was necessary
to separate the two communities and displace
the Turkish Cypriots. But now, 30 years later,
local peacebuilding efforts have emerged to
remedy or regulate the violence of the past on
the local level.
Considering other Politics and Scales for
Peacebuilding
The comparison of the cases of Pyla and
Potamia is of particular interest as it allows a
new understanding of the political and of the
local. The two cases point to the existence of
different local organisations of the political. The
organisation of the political, the stretch and the
rise of the common identity unifying the
structure, is different during periods of
mobilisation for peace and conflict and in
peaceful periods. The political, though
constructed on local practices, motivations and
power relations, is not independent from the
national political process. The political does not
develop outside the political system nor does it
represent the subaltern political power. On the
contrary, it bears the marks of the different
political systems (past and present), including
those of the state as much as that of the local
organisation of relations. It is the production of

46

other forms of the political is thus important in
that it helps penetrate and transform the
structural relations on the local level. This
intervention can be embedded in the actual
political forms of the local. Unless this effort is
made, mobilisation can happen very quickly
and is difficult to be contained on the local
level.
At the same time, the understanding of these
particular meanings of the political and its
scales can benefit the state. They can help to
develop and transform this political institution
through the process of peacebuilding. The
state, as it is the most representative
institution, controls the means to the
production of politics. This article does not
suggest particular ways by which these
perceptions of the political and of the local
should be integrated into peace plans. It
suggests that the situations observed by
anthropologists, should be considered to
implement peace successfully. The experience
of conflict and peace mobilisation in particular
areas can contribute to a better understanding
of the problems and to a new peacebuilding.
Last but not least, this understanding does not
eliminate the confusion about continuities and
ruptures between conflict, post-conflict, and
peace. Is the structural enmity observed
amongst Greek and Turkish Cypriots in Pyla
peace, or is it conflict? Is this a consociational
form of organising relations from below or is it
a form of institutionalised conflict? The
continuities and ruptures observed at the two
localities point to two different understandings
of peace. They do not close the discussion on
these continuities and ruptures, but open a
new one on the feasibility of peacbuilding and
the actual meaning of peace.

it has – and to such a degree that the
apparently only way to halt violence was to
displace one of the communities. Violence
became a means to defend the new identities
as it became a means to settle local
interpersonal differences. The desire for
reconciliation since the 1990s mirrors the
intensity of the conflict in the 1960s and 1970s
(Boulding: 1962). Thirty years later, Potamia
promotes peace. The political can be
expressed through practices of violence and of
reconciliation. The absence of mechanism of
regulation in the villages of the region makes it
easy for new identitiesto expand locally. High
party participation amongst the inhabitants of
the region helps to channel new identities and
new political ideas, but the political is at the
end structured through these local structural
relations to become real local politics. The
close relations between the inhabitants of all
five villages make it even easier for networks
to unfold in the region and cross-cut various
groups. National and class identities can
divide, unite, or re-unite the region’s
inhabitants. Here the political is an integral part
of the everyday. Local relations and categories
are revisited when political ideas change.
UN Peacekeeping interventions in Potamia
proved to be efficient. The UN Peacekeepers
halted violence in the region by transferring the
Turkish Cypriot community to Turkish
enclaves. The decision of the Turkish Cypriots
to return to their village was triggered by their
own authorities, as was the decision of Greek
Cypriots to accept them without making
trouble. Their decision to fight in 1974
depended on the political groups to which they
belonged, and the Turkish Cypriots´ decision to
leave the village was encouraged by their
authorities. However, it seems that the UN
supervision of Pyla after 1974 did not have a
particular role on the peacebuilding process
inside the village other than to reinforce
economic cooperation. If the violence has
temporarily ceased, it is due to the division of
the island and the new form of protracted
conflict. As shown by the 1996 events, the
inhabitants can quickly opt for violent
interaction.
These cases challenge the actual efforts for
peacebuilding as it is promoted through
international organisations by bringing in a new
dimension of the political that can reinforce the
peace process. The understanding of these
local definitions of the political can prove
helpful and help prevent a potential breakdown
of the state. The reinforcement of the
institutions of the state and the consociational
form of organisation of relations inside a new
state for Cyprus can easily provoke the same
problems as in 1963. The understanding of

Bibliography
Abèles, Marc (1990): Anthropologie de l'Etat.
Armand Colin: Paris.
Aidan, Hehir and Robinson, Neil (2007): Statebuilding: Theory and practice. Routledge: New
York.
Bahcheli, Tozun/ Bartman, Barry/ Srebrnik,
Henry (2004): De Facto States: The Quest for
Sovereignty. Routledge: London.
Bax, Mart (2000): Warlords, Priests and the
Politics of Ethnic Cleansing: A Case-Study
from Rural Bosnia Hercegovina. In Ethnic and
Racial Studies 23:1: 16-36.
Boutros-Ghali, Boutros (1992): An Agenda for
Peace: Preventive Diplomacy, Peacemaking
and Peace-keeping. A/47/277-S/241111-S/24.

47

Holland, Robert (1993-1994): Greek-Turkish
relations, Istanbul and the British rule in
Cyprus, 1954-1959: some experts from the
British Public Archive. In: Bulletin of the Center
of Asia Minor Studies 10, Athènes.

Department of Public Information, United
Nations: New York.
http://www.un.org/Docs/SG/agpeace.html,
viewed on 10.02. 2010.
Boulding, Kenneth (1962): Conflict and
Defense: A general Theory. Harper and
brothers: New York.

Ker-Lindsay, James (2005): EU Accession and
UN Peacemaking in Cyprus. Palgrave/
Macmillan: England.

Bryant, Rebecca (2001): Justice or respect? A
comparative perspective on politics in Cyprus.
In: Ethnic and Racial Studies 24:6: 892-924.

Kyriakides,
Stanley
(1968):
Cyprus:
Constitutionalism and Crisis Government.
University
of
Pennsylvania
Press:
Pennsylvania.

Chandler, David (2005): Introduction: Peace
without
Politics?
In:
International
Peacekeeping 12:3: 307-321.

Lederach, John Paul (1998): Building Peace.
United States Institute for Peace Press:
Washington.

von Clausewitz, Carl (1976 rev. 1984): On
War. Princeton University Press: Princeton.

Liden, Kristoffer/ MacGinty, Roger/ Richmond,
Oliver (2009): Introduction: Beyond Northern
Epistemologies of Peace: Peacebuilding
reconstructed. In: International Peacekeeping
16:5: 587-598.

Cockburn, Cynthia (2004): The Line: Women,
partition and the gender order in Cyprus. Zed
Books: New York.
Crawford, James (2006): The creation of states
in international law. Oxford University Press:
Oxford.

Loizos, Peter (1981): The heart grown bitter: A
chronicle of Cypriot war refugees. Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge.

Crawshaw, Nancy (1960): The Republic of
Cyprus: From the Zurich Agreement to
Independence. In: The world today: 16:2.

Loizos, Peter (1975): The Greek Gift: Politics
in a Cypriot village. Blackwell: Oxford.

Diez, Thomas (2002): The European Union
and the Cyprus Conflict. Manchester University
Press: Manchester.

Markides, Kyriacos (1977): The rise and fall of
the Republic of Cyprus. Yale University Press:
New Haven.

Drousiotis, Makarios (2005): I proti dihotomisi:
Kipros 1963-1964 [The first partition: Cyprus
1963-1964] Alphadi: Nicosia.

Mirbagheri, Farid (1998):
International
Peacemaking.
Company.

Galtung, Johan (1969): Violence, Peace and
Peace Research. In: Journal of Peace
Research 6: 167-191.

Papadakis, Y.iannis (1997): Pyla: A mixed
borderline village under UN supervision in
Cyprus. In: International Journal of Minority
and Group Rights 4: 353-372.

Grossetti, Michel (2006): Trois échelles
d'action et d'analyse: L'abstraction comme
opérateur d'échelle. In: L'Année Sociologique
56:2: 285-307.

Cyprus
Hurst

and
and

Papadakis, Y.iannis (2000): The Social
Mapping of the Unknown. In: Anthropological
Journal on European Cultures 9/2: 93-112.
Patrick, Richard (1976): Political geography
and
the
Cyprus
conflict:
1963-1971.
Department of Geography, University of
Waterloo, James Bater & Richard Preston:
Waterloo, Ontario.

Hatay, Mete (2005): Beyong numbers: An
inquiry into the Political Integration of the
Turkish “settlers”. PRIO Report 4. PRIO:
Nicosia.
Hatay, Mete (2007): Is the Cypriot population
shrinking? An overview of the ethnodemography of Cyprus in the light of the
preliminary results of the 2006 Turkish Cypriot
Census, PRIO: Nicosia.

Polyviou, Polyvios (1980): Cyprus: conflict and
negotiation: 1960-1980. Duckworth.
Tilly, Charles (1978): From mobilization to
Revolution. Random House: New York.

48

Tocci, Nathalie (2004): EU accession and
Conflict resolution. Ashgate: London.
Weston Markides, Diana (2001): Cyprus 19571963: From colonial conflict to constitutional
crisis: the key role of the municipal issue.
Minnessota Mediterranean and Eastern
European Monographs: Minnessota.

49

Index of Authors
Ainhoa Montoya is a PhD candidate in Social Anthropology at the University of Manchester. She
holds an MPhil in Anthropological Analysis from the University of Cambridge and a BA in Social
Anthropology from the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. Her PhD research explores the process of
transition from war to peace in El Salvador, inaugurated with the signing of the Peace Accords by
representatives of the Salvadoran state and FMLN guerrillas in 1992. More concretely, she examines
ordinary people’s perceptions of change with a focus on the perpetuation of violence and political
division in post-war El Salvador. Her research interests include the anthropology of violence and
conflict, the ethnography of the state, and the study of memory processes and history-building
practices.
Regine Penitsch is a PhD candidate at the Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology in Halle
(Saale). She holds a Master Artium in Social Anthropology, Islamic Studies and Religious Studies from
the Free University of Berlin. Her field research to date was dedicated to: identity construction among
Moroccan student migrants in Berlin; coping strategies of cultivators with water scarcity in southern
Morocco; the experience of war among internally displaced people in Darfur; and (as her PhD
research) the role of identity in the Darfur conflict in Khartoum. Her research interests include the
study of identity, voluntary and forced migration, and conflict and peace.
Barbara Karatsioli has received her PhD in Social Anthropology at the École des Hautes Études en
Sciences Sociales (EHESS) in 2009. In her work, she conducts a comparative analysis of changes in
the relations between enemies in coexistence during the transformation of conflict and peace
dynamics. Her PhD focuses on the particular cases of Greek and Turkish Cypriot coexistences in both
Cyprus and Great Britain in the general context of a divided country. She analyses processes of group
constitution, categorisation and identity construction. She has taught Methodology, General
Sociology, Sociology of Physical Activities and Sociology of Cultural Practices at the University of Evry
(Paris) and University Paris 13.

50

In der ÖSFK-Publikationsreihe „SAFRAN. Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für
Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung“ sind bislang erschienen:
Austrian Study Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution (ASPR), Lidauer Michael, Roithner
Thomas (eds.): Peace, Conflict, and Identity. Social Anthropological Explorations on the
Continuities and Ruptures between Conflict, Post-conflict, and Peace. SAFRAN –
Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung,
Paper 07, ISBN 978-3-900630-27-0, € 4,--, 54 pages, Wien – Stadtschlaining, March 2010
(abrufbar unter: http://www.aspr.ac.at/safran07.pdf).
Österreichisches Studienzentrum für Frieden und Konfliktlösung (ÖSFK), Leitner Georg,
Hackl Andreas, Roithner Thomas (Hrsg.): Kriege, Konflikte und Gewaltaustragung im
Wandel – Analysen und Perspektiven einer jungen ForscherInnengeneration, SAFRAN –
Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung,
Paper 06, ISBN 978-3-900630-26-3, € 4,--, ca. 100 Seiten, Wien – Stadtschlaining, März
2010 (abrufbar unter: http://www.aspr.ac.at/sak2009/safran06.pdf).
Österreichisches Studienzentrum für Frieden und Konfliktlösung (ÖSFK), Leitner Georg,
Glavitza Rita, Roithner Thomas (Hrsg.): Krieg und Armut – Analysen und Perspektiven einer
jungen
ForscherInnengeneration,
SAFRAN
–
Schlaininger
Arbeitspapiere
für
Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung, Paper 05, ISBN 978-3-90063025-6, € 4,--, 98 Seiten, Wien – Stadtschlaining, März 2009 (abrufbar unter:
http://www.aspr.ac.at/sak2008/safran05.pdf).
Österreichisches Studienzentrum für Frieden und Konfliktlösung (ÖSFK), Leitner Georg,
Glavitza Rita, Roithner Thomas, Alexandra Elbling (Hrsg.): Rohstoff- und Energiesicherheit.
Analysen und Perspektiven einer jungen ForscherInnengeneration, SAFRAN – Schlaininger
Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung, Paper 04,
ISBN 978-3-900630-24-9, € 4,--, 105 Seiten, Wien – Stadtschlaining, Juli 2008 (abrufbar
unter: http://www.aspr.ac.at/sak2007/safran04.pdf).
Österreichisches Studienzentrum für Frieden und Konfliktlösung (ÖSFK) Glavitza Rita,
Leitner Georg, Roithner Thomas, Alexandra Elbling (Hrsg.): Medien und Krieg. Analysen und
Perspektiven einer jungen ForscherInnengeneration, SAFRAN – Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere
für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung, Paper 03, ISBN 978-3900630-23-2, € 4,--, 52 Seiten, Wien – Stadtschlaining, Februar 2007 (abrufbar unter:
http://www.aspr.ac.at/sak2006/safran03.pdf).
Rita Glavitza: Failed Somalia? Strategien und Prozesse lokaler Akteure zum Nation- und
Statebuilding, SAFRAN – Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und
nachhaltige Entwicklung, Roithner Thomas, Elbling Alexandra, Österreichisches
Studienzentrum für Frieden und Konfliktlösung (Hrsg.), Paper 02, ISBN 978-3-900630-22-5,
€ 2,--, 36 Seiten, Wien – Stadtschlaining, Juli 2006, sowie 2. überarbeitete Auflage,
November 2006.
Georg Leitner: Die Bedeutung von Nationalismus im Tschetschenien-Konflikt, SAFRAN –
Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung,
Roithner Thomas, Elbling Alexandra, Österreichisches Studienzentrum für Frieden und
Konfliktlösung (Hrsg.), Paper 01, ISBN 978-3-900630-21-8, € 2,--, 28 Seiten, Wien –
Stadtschlaining, Juli 2006.

51

In der ÖSFK-Publikationsreihe „Working Papers“ sind u.a. erschienen:
Michael Lidauer (Hg.), Pilot Course on Security Sector Reform (SSR). Peace Center Burg
Schlaining:
ASPR
Working
Paper
1/2009.
(abrufbar
unter:
http://www.aspr.ac.at/publications/ssr_wp_09.pdf).
Michael Lidauer (Hg.), Women in Armed Conflict. Pilot Specialisation Course of the
International Civilian Peace-keeping and Peace-building Training Program. Peace Center
Burg
Schlaining:
ASPR
Working
Paper
1/2008
(abrufbar
unter:
http://www.aspr.ac.at/publications/wp1_08.pdf).

In der ÖSFK-Publikationsreihe „Dialog – Beiträge zur Friedensforschung“ sind als
Dokumentationen der Sommerakademien erschienen:
ÖSFK (Hrsg.), Projektleitung: Thomas Roithner: Söldner, Schurken, Seepiraten. Von der
Privatisierung der Sicherheit und dem Chaos der „neuen“ Kriege, 345 Seiten, ISBN 9-78364350-099-1, € 9,80, 2. Auflage, Lit-Verlag, Berlin – Wien, Jänner 2010.
ÖSFK (Hrsg.), Projektleitung: Roithner Thomas: Globale Armutsbekämpfung – ein
Trojanisches Pferd? Auswege aus der Armutsspirale oder westliche Kriegsstrategien?, 364
Seiten, ISBN 9-7838-2581-762-6, € 9,80, 2. Auflage, Lit-Verlag, Berlin – Wien, Jänner 2009.
ÖSFK (Hrsg.), Projektleitung: Roithner Thomas: Von kalten Energiestrategien zu heißen
Rohstoffkriegen? Schachspiel der Weltmächte zwischen Präventivkrieg und zukunftsfähiger
Rohstoffpolitik im Zeitalter des globalen Treibhauses, 312 Seiten, ISBN 9-7838-2580-931-7,
€ 9,80, Lit-Verlag, Berlin – Wien, Februar 2008.
ÖSFK (Hrsg.), Projektleitung: Roithner Thomas: Gute Medien – Böser Krieg? Medien am
schmalen Grat zwischen Cheerleadern des Militärs und Friedensjournalismus, 176 Seiten,
ISBN 9-7838-2580-1373, € 9,80, Lit-Verlag, Berlin – Wien, Juni 2007.
ÖSFK (Hrsg.), Projektleitung: Roithner Thomas: Die Weltunordnung von Ökonomie und
Krieg. Von den gesellschaftlichen Verwerfungen der neoliberalen Globalisierung zu den
weltumspannenden politischen Ansätzen jenseits des Casinokapitalismus, 305 Seiten, ISBN
3-7000-0503-2, € 9,80, Lit-Verlag, Münster – Wien, 3. durchgesehene Auflage, August 2008.

Sonstige Neuerscheinungen:
ÖSFK (Hrsg.), Projektleitung und Koordination: Mader Gerald und Roithner Thomas:
Europäische Friedenspolitik. Inhalte, Differenzen, Methoden und Chancen, 488 Seiten, ISBN
978-3-8258-0932-4, € 9,80, Lit-Verlag, Münster – Berlin – Wien, Februar 2008.
Bock-Leitert Karin, Roithner Thomas (Hrsg.): Der Preis des Krieges. Gespräche über die
Zusammenhänge von Wirtschaft und Krieg, 202 Seiten, ISBN 978-394168-808-7, € 14,--,
Prospero Verlag, Münster, März 2010.

Bestellbar im gut sortierten Buchhandel oder unter aspr@aspr.ac.at

52

Peace Center Schlaining
The Austrian Study Center for Peace and Conflict Resolution (ASPR) was founded in
September 1982 as an independent, non-profit and non-partisan organization. The ASPR
aims to contribute to the promotion of peace and peaceful conflict resolution and to the
dissemination of practical ideas for peace, including its developmental and environmental
aspects. In order to carry out these tasks, the ASPR conducts and evaluates research in line
with its objectives, engages in training and education, and conducts scientific courses.
It also publishes several periodicals (Dialog, Friedensforum, Working Papers, SAFRAN)
dealing with peace issues. Several major conferences are organised each year, including the
summer academy and an annual international meeting of peace researchers on “The State
of Peace”.
ASPR was the founder of the European University Center for Peace Studies. A European
Peace Museum in Schlaining Castle has been established. In order to help to facilitate ASPR
activities, ASPR set up an unique infrastructure including the Peace Library in a former
synagogue, a Conference Center in Schlaining Castle, the Hotel Burg Schlaining, and Haus
International, which is a student hostel. For these and other efforts, the ASPR was awarded
the UN “Peace Messenger” status in 1987, and, together with the EPU, the UNESCO-Price
for Peace Education 1995.

53

Peace and conflict have long been among the research
foci of Social Anthropologists. Not the end of history,
but changes in the world order since the break down of
the Soviet Union, (re)emerging frozen conflicts and
identity politics, new markets of violence, changing
means of warfare and cooperation have led anthropologists to return to well-known sites under unknown
conditions, to link viable theories to new social realities, and to explore other research dimensions than
before. Among the challenges anthropologists face is how
to make sense of these dimensions and how to best
communicate them.
SAFRAN 07 brings together selected contributions to the
2nd Bi-Annual PACSA Meeting at the ASPR in 2009 that
relate to continuities and ruptures between conflict,
post-conflict, and peace in different ways.
All based
on intensive and most recent fieldwork in three
culturally and geographically distinct conflict zones –
El Salvador, Sudan, and Cyprus – this work in progress
manages to inspire anthropologists and non-anthropologists in thinking about the categories of peace,
conflict, and identity.

With contributions by Barbara
Montoya and Regine Penitsch.

Karatsioli,

Ainhoa

SAFRAN
Schlaininger Arbeitspapiere für Friedensforschung, Abrüstung und nachhaltige Entwicklung

ISBN: 978-3-900630-27-0

