SECOND TRACK DIPLOMACY EFFORTS TO MITIGATE CONFLICTS
BETWEEN TURKS AND GREEKS, TURKISH CYPRIOTS AND GREEK
CYPRIOTS, AND TURKS AND ARMENIANS

BURCU YEŞİLADALI SAVAŞAN
102605022

İSTANBUL BİLGİ UNIVERSITY
INSTITUTE OF SOCIAL SCIENCES
MASTER OF ARTS IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

THESIS SUPERVISOR: PROF. DR. ŞULE KUT
APPROVED BY: PROF. DR. ŞULE KUT
PROF. DR. İLTER TURAN
ASST. PROF. DR. SERHAT GÜVENÇ
APPROVAL DATE: 14 JUNE 2005
KEY WORDS:
Second track diplomacy, unofficial diplomacy, conflict resolution, peace,
non-governmental organisations, Turkey-Greece, Cyprus issue, TurkeyArmenia

Abstract

For over one decade the international community is witnessing fundamental alterations in the
violent conflict map of the world while the role of states and non-state actors keep on
continuously transforming in a parallel process. Non-governmental, non-state and civil
society organisations and private individuals have more involvement in attempts of
nonviolent action, peace-building, conflict resolution and reconciliation. Thereby the research
clearly aims to assess the effectiveness of unofficial diplomacy work conducted by civic
organisations and individuals to mitigate conflict between Turks and Greeks, Turkish
Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, and Turks and Armenians. The research tries to reach this aim
by giving a general review of non-governmental contributions to peace work—termed as
second track diplomacy—where theoretical framework is strengthened by concrete cases. The
work contains a brief introduction on three conflict cases in order to make the reader
acquainted with the issues relating to second track activities. To execute the assessment, three
unofficial diplomacy structures—one women’s peace initiative, one interactive problemsolving workshop initiative and one business oriented peace initiative—for each of the
conflict cases have been highlighted. The in-depth analysis and evaluation of nine different
second track diplomacy cases is elaborated by using a number of criteria. Yet, the assessment
highlights similarities and differences of these cases in a number of layers. The author wishes
to have made a contribution to the work of systematic compilation of experiences in unofficial
peace activism with the hope that others can learn from these experiences, and more and more
people and organisations become acquainted and engaged in nonviolent peace action.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

i

Özet

Uluslararası toplum, on yılı aşkın bir süredir dünyanın sıcak çatışma haritası üzerindeki temel
değişimlere tanıklık etmektedir. Diğer yandan devletlerin ve devlet dışı aktörlerin rolleri
paralel bir süreç içinde sürekli dönüşüme uğramaktadır. Şiddetsiz eylem, barışın inşası,
çatışma çözme ve uzlaşma çabalarında hükümet dışı ve devlet dışı örgütler, sivil toplum
kuruluşları ve bireyler artık daha çok alakadar ve katılımcı olmaktadırlar. Bu kapsamda bu
araştırma Türkler ve Yunanlılar, Kıbrıslı Türkler ve Kıbrıslı Rumlar, ve Türkler ve Ermeniler
arasındaki çatışmanın hafifletilmesi için sivil örgütler tarafından yürütülen gayri resmi
diplomasi çalışmalarının etkinliğini değerlendirmeyi amaçlamaktadır. Araştırma bu amaca
ulaşmak için ikinci kanal diplomasi olarak adlandırılan hükümet dışı kanallar vasıtasıyla
yürütülen barış çalışmaları üzerine genel bir inceleme sunmaktadır. Diğer yandan teorik
çerçeve somut örneklerle güçlendirilmektedir. Çalışma, ikinci kanal diplomasi etkinliklerini
ilgilendiren konular hakkında okuyucuyu bilgilendirmek üzere yukarıda adı geçen üç çatışma
vakası üzerine kısa bir özet içermektedir. Değerlendirmeyi yapmak için her bir çatışma vakası
için üç farklı sivil diplomasi yapısı—bir kadın barış girişimi, bir etkileşimli problem çözme
forumu ve bir ticari barış girişimi—ele alınmıştır. Dokuz farklı ikinci kanal diplomasi
vakasının derinlemesine analizi ve değerlendirmesini yapmak üzere bir dizi kriter
kullanılmıştır. Değerlendirme bununla birlikte vakalar arasındaki farklar ve benzerlikleri
farklı düzlemlerde incelemektedir. Yazar sivil barış aktivizmi alanında edinilen tecrübelerin
sistemli bir şekilde derlenmesi çalışmasına bir katkıda bulunmuş olmayı, başkalarının bu
tecrübelerden faydalanmasını, daha çok kişi ve kuruluşun şiddet içermeyen barış eylemi
hakkında bilgi sahibi olması ve bu alana katkı sağlamasını ümit etmektedir.
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

ii

“To All Women Peacemakers”

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

iii

Table of Contents

List of Tables .....................................................................................................................….viii
List of Figures ....................................................................................................................….viii
List of Abbreviations ................................................................................................................ix
1. Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………1
2. Theoretical Framework ………………………………………………………………..9
2.1. Common Terms on Violence and Conflict …………………………………9
2.2. The Field of Peace and Conflict Resolution ………………………………16
2.3. Nonviolent Action ………………………………………………………...20
2.4. Non-governmental Organisations and Their Function in Conflict Resolution
Work ………………………………………………………………………21
2.5. Second Track Diplomacy as a Field ………………………………………24
2.6. Interactive Problem-Solving Approach as a Tool for Unofficial
Diplomacy………………………………………………………………….32
2.7. Psychopolitical Approaches in Conflict Resolution……………………….38
2.8. The Role of Women in Conflict Resolution ………………………………40
2.9. Multi Track Diplomacy as a Tool for Peacemaking and Conflict
Resolution.…………………………………………………………………43
2.10. Two Concrete Examples of Track Two Diplomacy Efforts ………………51
2.10.1. Protracted Burundian Conflict …………………………………….51
2.10.2. Northern Ireland Conflict ………………………………………….52
2.11. The Problems and Needs of the Field Track Two Diplomacy ……………57
3. Background Information on Chosen Conflicts ………………………………………57
3.1. Conflict between Turkey and Greece ……………………………………..56
3.2. Cyprus Conflict ……………………………………………………………62
3.3. Conflict between Turkey and Armenia ……………………………………70
4. Second Track Diplomacy Efforts …………………………………………………….75
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

vi

4.1. Women’s Peace Initiative (WINPEACE) …………………………………75
4.2. Hands Across the Divide (HAD) ………………………………………….80
4.3. Rapprochement Activities Led by Turkish and Armenian Women ………85
4.4. Greek Turkish Forum (GTF) ……………………………………………...87
4.5. Cyprus Consortium and Subsequent Bi-communal Activities ……………92
4.6. Turkish-Armenian Reconciliation Commission (TARC) …………………97
4.7. Turkish-Greek Business Council (TGBC) ……………………………….102
4.8. Reconciliation Activities Initiated by Cypriot Business Communities ….106
4.9. Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council (TABDC) ……….…110
5. An Overall Assessment of the Selected Unofficial Diplomacy Activities …………113
5.1. General Assessment of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives on Turkish-Greek
Conflict …………………………………………………………………..114
5.2. General Assessment of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives on Cyprus
Conflict………………………………………………………………...…116
5.3. General Assessment of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives on TurkishArmenian Conflict …………………………………………………….…118
5.4. Overall Assessment of Second Track Diplomacy Cases Outlined in the
Thesis ………………………………………………………………….....119
6. Conclusion.……………………………………………………………………….…139
References …………………………………………………………………………………..143

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

vii

List of Tables

Table 1.

Past and Present Examples of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives and Activities
for Turkish-Greek Rapprochement …………………………………………115

Table 2.

Past and Present Examples of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives and Activities
for Turkish Cypriot-Greek Cypriot Rapprochement ………………………..116

Table 3.

Past and Present Examples of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives and Activities
for Turkish-Armenian Rapprochement ……………………………………..119

Table 4.

SWOT Analyses of the Chosen Unofficial Diplomacy Structures and
Activities…………………………………………………………………….122

List of Figures

Figure 1.

Global Trends in Violent Conflict, 1946-2002 ………………………………..3

Figure 2.

Actors and Approaches to Peace-building …………………………………...30

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

viii

List of Abbreviations

AMIDEAST
ANC
AR
ARF
AU-CGP
BSC
BSEC
CAM
CBM
CC and following
CCCI
CDRSEE
CFD
CMG
CSW
DEİK
ECCG
ECOSOC
ELIAMEP
EOKA
EU
Eurasia
FGI
FRAT
GC
GR
GTF
HAD
ICC
ICG
ICJ
ICTJ
IFOR
IMTD
INCORE
INGO
İŞAD
KARSİAD
LMV

America-Mideast Educational and Training Services, Inc.
African National Congress
Armenian
Armenian Revolutionary Federation
Centre for Global Peace of the American University
Bi-Communal Conflict Resolution Committee
Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Crisis avoidance measure
Confidence building measure
Cyprus Consortium and subsequent bi-communal activities
Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Center for Democracy and Reconciliation in Southeast Europe
Christlicher Friedendienst
Conflict Management Group
Commission on the Status of Women
Foreign Economic Relations Board
European Centre for Common Ground
United Nations Economic and Social Council
Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy
National Organization of Cypriot Fighters
European Union
Eurasia Cultural and Social Development Association
Federation of Greek Industrialists
Armenian Turkish Rapprochement Forum
Greek Cypriot
Greek
Greek Turkish Forum
Hands Across the Divide
International Criminal Court
International Crisis Group
International Court of Justice
International Center for Transitional Justice
International Fellowship of Reconciliation
Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy
Initiative on Conflict Resolution and Ethnicity
International non-governmental organisation
TRNC Businessmen Association
Association of the Industrialists and the Businessmen in Kars
Lausanne Treaty Emigrants Foundation

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

ix

Marmara Group
NGO
NTL
OEB
PAG
Partners
POST
PRIO
RUSI
SCG
SECI
SIPRI
SME
STGP
SWOT
TABDC
TARC
TAYWG
TC
TCCC
TC-GC business
TDN
TESEV
TFP
TGBC
TMT
TR
Trainer Group
TR-AR women
TRNC
TUREB
TurGreSoc
TÜSİAD
TYDD
UN
UNDP
UNFICYP
UNOPS
UNSC
US
USAID
VAT
WINPEACE
Y2P

Marmara Group Strategic and Social Research Foundation
Non-governmental organisation
National Training Laboratories
Cyprus Employers and Industrialists Federation
Political Analysis Group
Partners for Democratic Change
Project Oriented Searching Team
International Peace Research Institute of Oslo
Royal United Services Institute
Search for Common Ground
Southeast European Cooperative Initiative
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
Small and medium size enterprise
Civil Society Development Program
Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats
Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council
Turkish-Armenian Reconciliation Commission
Turkish Armenian Young Women’s Group
Turkish Cypriot
Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce
Reconciliation activities initiated by Cypriot business communities
Turkish Daily News
Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation
Technology for Peace
Turkish-Greek Business Council
Turkish Defence Organisation
Turkish
Conflict Resolution Trainer Group
Rapprochement activities led by Turkish and Armenian women
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
Turkish Tourist Guide Associations
Turkish-Greek Student Society
Turkish Industrialists’ and Businessmen’s Association
Turkey-Greece Friendship Association
United Nations
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
United Nations Office for Project Services
United Nations Security Council
United States
US Agency for International Development
Vienna Armenian-Turkish Platform
Women’s Peace Initiative
Youth Promoting Peace

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

x

1. Introduction
“…when we do peace studies one of the first tasks is our liberation from forms of academic
cultural violence that becomes more, not less, violent by having survived too long. And the
next task is not to become a prisoner of those who present themselves as liberators—
including the present author” (Galtung, 1996: viii).

Having entered into a new century, the world is home to structural changes in
government- civil society and civil society- society relations. The end of the Cold War era
has engendered serious alterations in intrastate as well as interstate economic, political,
social and cultural relations. The start of the post Cold War era has begot changes in the
violent conflict map of the world as well. With the inauguration of this new era the number
of international wars has decreased dramatically. According to William I. Zartman, Cold
War’s passing has opened the era of conflicts of many types, where many of them “arose
over the inheritance of a former communist-supported domestic order” and some “arose
from deep-rooted antagonisms that had laid dormant or been held in check” (1997: 4).
This fact has instigated many scholars to make the assessment that the number of
intrastate violent conflicts has increased dramatically, since the end of the Cold War.
Though Ted Robert Gurr and Barbara Harff argue the escalation of ethnic conflicts since
the end of the Cold War is the continuation of a course that began as early as the 1960s; in
other words: the increase in ethnic conflicts in the 1990s was not supposed to be entirely
linked with the end of the Cold War. It is undeniable that that the collapse of the Soviet
Union and change of power position in the state system have speeded up the process for
ethnic groups to aspire to their interests. The expansion of the international news media has
brought about ethnic issues to be in the public eye; as a result it has started to raise public
awareness on the grave human consequences of these conflicts and related human rights

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

1

abuses (1994). One other inheritance from the Cold War is the abundance of arms that
have been transferred into areas where there is high potential of violent conflict. While
atrocities are committed using even the most primitive arms, the widespread access to
modern weapons has caused many people become mass murderers (Zartman, 1997). Mass
violence is now conducted “not so much by states against each other as by more
amorphous groups whose members are contesting the states and borders that contain them”
(Rasmussen, 1997: 30).
In the recently released second bi-annual global survey of armed conflicts, Monty
G. Marshall and Gurr make the general assessment that civil wars that expanded during the
Cold War seem to have been vanished in the new millennium. As seen on Figure 1, by the
end of 2002, global warfare has reduced to its lowest level since the early 1960s 1 . In
addition, international crises reduced in number and intensity in 1990s, where many of
them were kept under control by diplomatic measures (2003). On the other hand, Zartman
does not outline a positive picture of the Post Cold-War era, since he strongly argues the
international response to violent conflicts has been very weak and world’s political leaders
have been hesitant for mediation and direct involvement (1997).
Furthering their assessment, Marshall and Gurr state that positive trends of this new
era were not capable of reaching and upholding everyone equally. They assert that
“resistance to the West’s ascendancy, the rise of global terrorism, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, and decisions to counter these threats by unilateral and
military means threaten to reverse many of the gains of the 1990s” (2003: 50) 2 . The third
bi-annual global survey on armed conflicts expected in 2005 will certainly reflect a
deviation in the data due to US’s invasion of Iraq and interrelated grave human rights
abuses in the Middle East.
1

Only countries with at least 500.000 populations in 2002 are included in this study.
For obtaining information on most recent studies on global violent conflicts please see the web site of the
Center for International Development and Conflict Management at www.cidcm.umd.edu.

2

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

2

Figure 1. Global Trends in Violent Conflict, 1946-2002
Source: Marshall and Gurr, 2003: 12

There have been obviously few signs of interest shown by world’s leaders in
handling conflicts of the new era. This inaction caused the fierce reaction of the world
society who felt obliged to resolve conflicts because of reasons related with morality and
interest. Non-governmental organisations (NGO) are engaged in conflict resolution work
in a variety of positions using means that totally exclude negative pressure.
In the United Nations (UN) conferences held at various times starting from 1975 on
issues of women, development and environment, NGOs’ participation grew enormously.
As a response, the world governments started changing their attitudes towards NGOs. The
non-state actors were supportive to governments in accomplishing the recommendations
highlighted at these conferences. Nevertheless, this gradual trust building between NGOs
and the governments has led to attitude change of the UN Security Council (UNSC) in the
issue of conflict resolution. A remarkable example is the invitation of representatives from
CARE, Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors without Borders) and OXFAM by UNSC
members for a brief on the situation Great Lakes region of East Africa (McDonald, 2003;

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

3

2004). The UN conferences provide the NGOs the opportunity to lobby for their cause as a
community. On the other hand, there is only little proof that consultations of bodies like
the UNSC with non-state organisations make a difference in decision making, thus state
bodies never complain to leverage their public image with such symbolic consultations
(Schnabel, 2004). Another fact is that the informal mediation activities conducted by
NGOs or private individuals are not reported in the news (Bercovitch, 1997).
In the last decade, there have been several other efforts made by the UN to execute
programs for nonviolent conflict transformation as well as to incorporate the civil society
in these processes. The UN has proclaimed the period 2001-2010 as the ‘International
Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-violence for the Children of the World’3 . In
October 2000, UNSC unanimously passed the Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and
Security. Through this resolution the Security Council has recognized that “gender
perspectives and the special needs of women and girls must be incorporated in conflict
management and peace-building at all levels” (CFD, 2003). Hence, the Commission on the
Status of Women (CSW) emphasised when peace agreements have been concluded, the
implementation must be “pursued with explicit attention to women’s full and equal
participation and the goal of gender equality” (2004). The UN General Assembly having
adopted the resolution on the prevention of armed conflict acknowledged the collaborative
role of civil society in the prevention of armed conflict. The UN conference on the “Role
of Civil Society in Conflict Prevention” to be held in July 2005 will explore the future role
of the civil society in conflict prevention and it will define concrete ways to establish links
between civil society activities in preventing violent conflict and the work of governments
and the UN. The conference will also investigate the results and experience of the civil

3

A/RES/53/25

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

4

society work in this area and propose modifications in the civil society work (Kavan,
2003).
Moving further on the subject of non-state contributions in conflict resolution
processes, Kai Frithjof Brand-Jacobsen, the co-director of TRANSCEND 4 , divides peace
movements into three generations. The first generation emerging mid-nineteenth century
and continuing today had led to interstate mechanisms to resolve conflicts. The first and
second Hague Appeal for Peace are part of this generation. The second generation starting
around the same period is managed by citizens who argued peace is too important to leave
merely to the responsibility of governments. Peace and civil rights movements and the
third Hague Appeal for Peace belong to this generation. The third generation starting over
the last ten years claims that peace is too important to entrust to superficial approaches. It
says, peace must be prepared for, studied, learned, created and built and it should address
the root causes of conflicts (2004). Paul Van Tongeren, the executive director of the
European Centre for Conflict Prevention, puts forth the first Hague International Peace
Conference held in 1899 was not ripe for the approach that pools strengths, shares burdens
and divides labour among actors for the prevention of deadly conflicts. In the current era,
foreign policy is no longer in the control of a small group of statesmen conducting policies
of which the citizens remain uninformed (1999). Moreover, the system of sovereign states
is not structured to handle most international and intrastate identity based conflicts.
Inevitably, over the past fifteen years the number of people and organisations
involved in peace-building in ethnic and civil conflicts has been increased immensely. The
contribution of non-state actors to resolve conflicts all around the world can no longer be
ignored, as stated by Van Tongeren. In his introductory article in People Building Peace:
35 Inspiring Stories from Around the World he envisages to spread the hope that the

4

Romania based global peace and development organization.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

5

second half of the twentieth century full of armed conflicts has offered the necessary
conditions for peace-building in the twenty-first century (1999). It is undeniable that the
potential power of non-state actors, the civil society and the NGOs is significant, though
there are some controversies in this issue. Since the new atmosphere provides a new web
of relations where non-state actors implement programs to mitigate conflicts in
geographies dominated by armed conflict, it must be clear for governments to
acknowledge this shift in responsibility and power. Since violent conflicts occur in reaction
to needs based on identity, survival, security and well-being, non-state actors as third
parties are needed in the field to act as intermediaries to stop violence and make the
necessary interventions to transform the disturbed relations.
Even when we talk about interstate conflicts, the role of non-state communities in
those conflicts play a crucial role. As a consequence, intrastate communities act as conflict
actors, where their needs and positions need to be taken into consideration. These
marginalized and threatened communities’ needs cannot be responded in the current
system of diplomacy that has been designed almost to focus on the interest of states. When
people’s well-being is threatened by the state, the current state system blocks itself to serve
the interests of the communities that are mobilised around shared culture, religion,
ethnicity, language etc. In response to these conditions, second track diplomacy has
developed in order to understand the dynamics of conflicts and find ways to transform
violence to a peace process led by unofficial people or bodies. Since ongoing wars cause
civilian casualties as the major target—an estimated 80 percent—and cause many people
become displaced or live in severe conditions as refugees, the challenge is to strengthen the
international consensus to manage conflicts based on respect for human needs (Davies and
Kaufman, 2002).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

6

It has been proposed by peace researchers and peace activists that there should be a
systematic compilation of stories and experiences in nonviolent action gathered from all
around the world. These stories should not only cover what has been done, but also reflect
how the process has been conducted and how others can learn from these experiences
(Brand-Jacobsen, 2004). With the hope of making a humble contribution to this ambitious
goal, the thesis aims at making an assessment of second track diplomacy initiations on
Turkish-Greek, Turkish-Armenian, and Turkish Cypriot- Greek Cypriot relations, first by
outlining the theoretical framework of second track diplomacy and second researching and
making an in depth analysis on the highlighted conflict resolution activities undertaken by
unofficial bodies. The thesis has three focal points: first the theory of conflict resolution
and peacemaking, second track two diplomacy that refer to civic initiatives taking the lead
to mitigate conflicts and third non-official diplomacy cases that envision to ease the
tension between Turks and Greeks, Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriots, and Turks and
Armenians at the political and societal level. There are many thematic layers that
inevitably involve the realm of the thesis, these are: the root causes of conflicts of the
selected cases, the current state of relations with needs and positions of both sides i.e.
Turks and Greeks, Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots and Turks and Armenians, and the
role played by NGOs in this new era.
In Chapter 2 an overall and to the depth research will be illuminated on various
approaches in conflict resolution, peacemaking and second track diplomacy theories. These
concepts will be followed by theories and praxis in second track diplomacy, the area that
the thesis directly involved with. Various concepts concerning peace, violence, conflict and
conflict resolution will be defined. In order to clarify the meaning of violence and peace,
the concepts of direct, structural and cultural violence, as well as negative and positive
peace will be defined for categorisation. So as to comprehend conflict resolution, all its

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

7

functions and different stages will be explained in detail. This chapter will delve into the
field of second track diplomacy by looking into its application, function and effectiveness
conducted by many scholars and practitioners in conflict situations. For classifying second
track diplomacy activities, the concept of multi track diplomacy will serve for further
categorisation.
In Chapter 3, the thesis will provide some background information on conflicts
between Turks and Greeks, Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, and Turks and
Armenians. This general description will address the needs and positions of parties in
conflict so as to assist the reader in understanding the conditions that second track
diplomacy efforts are faced with. Since the main focus of the thesis is not the conflict and
their analysis, only a short historical background on the chosen conflicts will be provided,
which might provide a minimum basis for understanding and analysing unofficial
diplomacy initiatives.
Chapter 4 elucidates three particular types of second track diplomacy organisations
for each of the three conflict cases. Women’s peace initiatives, problem-solving workshops
also named as interactive conflict resolution efforts and business initiatives with notable
experience in rapprochement will be highlighted for furthering the analysis of civic
diplomacy efforts. Before furthering the analysis of these nine different initiatives, an
overview on second track diplomacy efforts will be explained with its historical
background, accomplishments and current status. The initiations that are stressed in the
thesis structure are Women’s Peace Initiative (WINPEACE), Hands Across the Divide
(HAD), Rapprochement activities led by Turkish and Armenian women, Greek Turkish
Forum (GTF), Cyprus Consortium and subsequent bi-communal activities, TurkishArmenian Reconciliation Commission (TARC), Turkish-Greek Business Council (TGBC),

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

8

Reconciliation activities initiated by Cypriot business communities and Turkish-Armenian
Business Development Council (TABDC).
With the light of previous chapters, Chapter 5 will have a glance on the
effectiveness of the chosen second track diplomacy cases and it will make an overall
assessment of these highlighted cases. The assessment will be illustrated with a number of
criteria.
It should be noted that the aim of this thesis is neither to explore the role of NGOs
in the society, nor to describe various stages of conflict formation and conflict resolution
and nor to make an in depth analysis of the chosen conflicts and make propositions for
normalisation of relations. As mentioned earlier, the thesis aims to assess the work of
unofficial diplomacy initiatives that work to contribute to the mitigation of chosen
conflicts.

2. Theoretical Framework
“We were seated in a small room, about fourteen of us. Some were under the bunks that
lined three walls, some on the top beds with their feet dangling. It was our second, maybe
third visit to the room. I remembered our first visit for the defining question that faced our
little envoy of mediators and peaceniks. ‘Before you start,’ they had said, ‘we just want to
know one thing. What makes you think that violence doesn’t work?’” (Lederach, 1999:
27) 5

2.1. Common Terms on Violence and Conflict
Conflict can be defined as the pursuit of incompatible goals set by different groups
or people. Conflict is a fact that can be experienced at all levels of human activity from the
intra-personal to the inter-personal, from intrastate to the interstate level. Edward Azar

5

Referring to meetings held with people at Maze Prison in Northern Ireland.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

9

states “[p]erception of mutually incompatible goals among communities with limited
coordinating or mediating mechanisms gives birth to conflict” (Azar, 2002: 16). J. Lewis
Rasmussen defines conflict as “escalated competition at any system level between groups
whose aim is to gain advantage in the area of power, resources, interests, values, or needs”
(1997:32, quoting Laue, 1991). Dispute refers to competition over issues that are
negotiable and include elements of compromise whereas conflict refers to issues that are
involved with deep-rooted human needs (Kriesberg, 1997).
Though regarded as a negative interaction, conflict does not have to be understood
always in a fully negative framework. Conflict is a permanent feature of social and
political life that can lead to beneficial change. Conflict can be comprehended as a socially
constructed fact that often occurs for good reason. When managed in the proper way social
conflict is a motivating factor for constructive adaptation and development, which is a
mandatory condition for sustainable peace (Zartman, 1997; Davies and Kaufman, 2002).
Johan Galtung argues that conflict can also lead to constructive behaviours, meaning
dialogue with others about the problems. Constructive and destructive behaviour can live
at the same time, even in the same person. He formulates the concept of conflict as the
combination of attitudes/ assumptions, behaviour and contradiction (1996).
Raymond Shonholtz in his article on interethnic conflict in Central and Eastern
Europe explains that in the West conflict is taken as a constructive engine for social
change. During the old Communist regime, conflict was perceived in the framework of
class struggle; hence conflict was equated with deviant behaviour or political discord that
has only one winner and many losers. He adds that new democracies in Central and
Eastern Europe and the republics of the former Soviet Union lack the foundations to accept
and manage conflict. Under the old regimes, prohibition of expressing differences caused
ethnic and national minorities to get suppressed (1998).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

10

Speaking of various forms of conflict; armed conflict represents circumstances
where conflict parties resort to the use of force. The definition of armed conflict is very
broad since it covers situations ranging from an attack on a civilian by a soldier to massive
casualties. Violent or deadly conflict though similar to armed conflict is significant with its
characteristic of one-sided violence such as genocide against unarmed civilians (TCC,
2002).
Speaking of definitions of other forms of conflict, as a scholar-practitioner who has
initiated six conflict resolution centres around the world, John Burton asserts that deeprooted conflict occurs with authorities, between authorities and among people within
societies. Deep-rooted conflict is involved with cases that emerge from unacceptable
demands on people that are probably beyond human tolerance. Burton defines the
symptoms of deep-rooted conflict as “hostage taking, illegal strikes, public protest
movements, ethnic violence, terrorism, gang warfare” and other forms of unyielding
opposition to authorities. He makes the assessment that containment of deep-rooted
conflicts is only possible with alterations in norms, institutions and policies. The attempt of
direct containment of above mentioned symptoms and equating violence with deep-rooted
conflict—though deep-rooted conflicts are likely to lead to eruption of violence—must be
avoided. Superficial ways of treating disputes as done by lawyers, public officials in courts
or other bodies can lead to major social problems in the longer term (1990: 15).
To conceptualise protracted social conflict, Azar asserts that it has evolved as an
outcome of factors like colonial legacies, communal enmities, economic migration,
human-made natural disasters and lack of security. He states that protracted social conflict
should be understood in terms of “human needs, communal context, governance and the
role of state, environmental factors, and international linkages”. Azar groups human needs
in three: security, access and acceptance. The most basic human needs are physical

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

11

survival and well-being, which depend upon safety, productive capability and access to
physical resources such as food, clothing, energy and water. Access to social institutions is
vital for equal distribution of resources and for benefiting from security opportunities.
Acceptance of identity related with class, race, language or religion is a sociopsychological need essential for psychological well-being of individuals and communities.
Azar strongly argues “groups who are accepted are more likely to accept others in turn”. If
basic human needs are not met, complaints are expressed in a collective way rather than on
an individual basis. The preconditions of protracted social conflict are transformed into
violent conflict due to “communal actions and strategies, state actions and strategies and
the built-in-properties of conflict” (2002: 18-21).
Using the term ethnopolitical conflict Gurr and John Davies refer to those conflicts
“involving, as a primary party, at least one nonstate group with distinct cultural, ethnic, or
religious traits” (2002: 31). In their valuable volume on ethnopolitical groups and ethic
conflict with detailed analysis on four cases6 Gurr and Harff make the assessment that if
there are peaceful relations among peoples for a long time, their different identities weaken
eventually (1994). For example, in the first part of the twentieth century, in South Tirol
there was tension between German and Italian speakers. After 1950s, as the economy
improved and the Italian leadership decided to leave German speakers at peace the ethnic
consciousness disappeared for several decades (Volkan, 1997). Gurr and Harff further
hypothesize “the more the democratic political environment, the more likely ethnopolitical
groups will be to voice opposition nonviolently…, the more extreme force is used, the less
likely the chances for open rebellion”. Once ethnic conflict is escalated into rebellion
sometimes it becomes impossible to reach a peaceful conclusion. Some groups on both

6

These four cases of ethnopolitical groups are; the Kurds in the Middle East, Miskito Indians of Central
America, Chinese in Malaysia and Turkish immigrants in Germany.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

12

sides might think they have more gain in continuing the fight than accepting compromises
(1994: 85).
According to Herbert C. Kelman, international or ethnic conflict is “driven by
nonfulfillment or threats to the fulfilment of basic needs”. These needs include material
and psychological ones. Material needs refer to food, shelter, physical safety and physical
well-being. Psychological needs refer to identity, security, recognition, autonomy, selfesteem and justice. In protracted conflict, fears about the denial of these needs often
transform into an existential character, where community finds itself in a struggle for
communal survival. Therefore conflicts about territory and resources usually reflect and
further magnify concerns about security and identity; and “subjective forces linked to basic
needs and existential fears contribute heavily to its escalation and perpetuation”. In ethnic
conflicts, the role of existential fears are emphasised more. In international conflicts, needs
and fears of societies are generally manipulated by the leadership. For example, the fear of
extermination of a community is often linked with fear of personal extermination (Kelman,
1997: 195-197). Gurr and Harff put it that ethnic groups mobilize when the strong ethnic
group identity combines with imposed disadvantages (1994).
A protracted conflict can escalate in the occurrence of mutual distrust between
opposing groups, a minor event, individual grievances turning into collective ones,
irreconcilable communal demands, suppression of collective protests and political
inequality. When community’s demands are not met and the state chooses to exert
coercion, it is likely that the community seeks external military and economic support. In
case of eruption of violence, spiral acts of violence and continuous deprivation of basic
needs perpetuate antagonisms and lead to mutual dehumanisation of the enemy (Azar,
2002). Gurr and Harff assert that protracted communal conflicts that arose over the demand
and rights of ethnic groups have caused more misery and atrocities than has any other type

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

13

of local, regional and international conflicts in five decades after the end of the World War
II (1994).
Inter-communal conflict is caused by economic and political deprivation or
exploitation based on collective identity, for this reason economic development is
considered as a key factor for conflict management (Azar, 2002).
Louis Kriesberg examines the concept of deeply rooted and protracted conflict,
which he names intractable conflicts. According to him, protracted conflict refers to longlasting conflicts often linked with aspects like ethnicity and other identities, while
intractable conflict explains conflicts that are resistant to settlement. Intractable conflicts
possess four dimensions defined by Kriesberg. First they are long lasting, persisting for
more than a generation. Young generation is brought up with stories of the enemy, who the
enemy is and what cruelties the enemy has conducted. This socialisation contributes to
sustaining the conflict. Second, the leader of the antagonist groups claim the other party’s
goals irreconcilable, with the belief they will be destroyed by the other party if they cease
fighting. Third, a number of members of antagonist groups possess some interest in the
continuation of the conflict, either in ideological or in the material form. Fourth, in
intractable conflicts destructive means are used, such as killings and physical damaging
(1998b).
The intractability of a conflict is defined by the relative power imbalance between
adversaries; hence the power asymmetry is due to interpretation. The adversaries on each
side continuously perceive themselves as endangered by the other side. For example, South
African whites interpreted themselves as threatened by South African black people during
years of Apartheid while the blacks regarded themselves dominated and exploited by the
whites. The increase of the intractability of a conflict is also linked with refusal of claim
for fundamental human rights or the claim to be recognized as a legitimate collectivity by

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

14

the other group. The internal relationship within groups is also a factor engendering the
conflict to become more intractable. Opinion leaders of the society might provoke
emotions of fear and hatred toward enemies. While sense of belonging provides comfort
and meaning for some group members, for some others it can serve as a tool for power and
influence. Dissenting or alternative group members are either silenced, excluded or they
withdraw voluntarily (Kriesberg, 1998).
Violence appears when conflicts are systematically not managed constructively,
when they are totally overlooked, or social, economic and political systems are deeply
unequal and destructive (Brand-Jacobsen, 2004). At this stage, it should be noted that
violence and conflict represent two different concepts. In 1981, Galtung has articulated the
distinction between three types of violence where these three function in a trilateral
relationship. Direct violence represents direct attacks by actors who intend to create
consequences of violence. Indirect, covert or structural violence is embedded in the social
structure, between humans, between societies, between regions in the world stemming
from repression, exploitation and injustice. The third form, cultural violence acts in order
to legitimise direct and structural violence. It is notable that culture is the great legitimiser
of violence, while it can be also of peace. Cultural violence attempts to justify or glorify
direct and structural violence. Cultural violence can be hidden in religion, ideology,
language, art, science, law, media and education (1996). With the articulation of this
categorisation, it becomes clear that the effects of violence cannot be measured only by
assessing the death, casualty, physical damage and destruction.
One other valuable contribution of Galtung to peace studies has been the distinction
he made between negative and positive peace. According to his—and now standard—
definition, negative peace exists when only direct violence is absent. The main aim of
negative peace is to reduce the potential for armed conflict by precautions like

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

15

disarmament. Positive peace is characterised by the conditions where structural and
cultural violence are overcome as well. It seeks eradication of militarism and elimination
of severe effects of cruel social systems. Direct violence is ceased through transforming
conflict behaviours; structural violence ends when structural injustices are eliminated, and
cultural violence is removed when attitudes are changed. We cannot think of a genuine and
durable peace without the existence of justice, as there cannot be real justice without peace.
2.2. The Field of Peace and Conflict Resolution
“… the obsession with the removal of one leader and the belief that his removal will end
the country’s problems is … not found in any conflict resolution material… Western
nations, instead of promoting dialogue, negotiations, and compromise, are actively
reinforcing the fallacious argument that conflicts can be resolved by the use of force” (Van
Eck, 2001: 87-88).

There are many terms related with different stages and processes of peace and
conflict resolution. Conflict management means putting and end to violent conflict or
stopping violence related means that maintain a conflict. It refers to limitation, mitigation
and containment of the conflict. Conflict settlement refers to reaching an agreement
between opposing parties through negotiation and bargaining. It means suppressing the
conflict without addressing the root cause of it. Conflict resolution refers to eliminating the
causes of conflict that arose between two or more parties as well as removing the root
causes of incompatibility. It has a more comprehensive approach that is based on joint
problem-solving. Conflict transformation refers to changing relations between conflicting
parties so as to make peace sustainable. It necessitates a longer-term investment, where
deeper structural dimensions of the conflict are addressed and social changes at different
levels of society are achieved. Finally conflict prevention covers all activities aiming to

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

16

prevent the outbreak of violence. Peacemaking efforts after eruption of violence will
inevitably overlap with conflict prevention efforts.
Peacemaking indicates diplomatic efforts to handle conflict, according to the UN
Charter. Peacekeeping means to position forces with the consent of parties in order to
monitor a peace agreement. Peace-enforcement is the usage of military efforts to bring
adversary parties under control. And peace-building refers to allocating structural
measures to prevent the re-eruption of violence.
Some scholars make a distinction between traditional peacekeeping and second
generation peacekeeping, where the latter aims to implement a lasting peace rather than to
stop violence where it occurs. Attempts for an enduring peace stand out as the most
relevant tools since short term and temporary interventions in protracted conflicts rarely
lead to sustainable solutions. Transformation of a conflict refers to an intentional process
of applying “changes in a conflict’s manifestation at the personal, relational, structural and
cultural levels” (Rasmussen, 1997: 41).
The conditions of coexistence and reconciliation according to Kriesberg are to be
reached after bitter conflicts between peoples. Coexistence refers to a wide range of
relationships between parties who possess no intention to destroy each other.
Reconciliation refers to a friendly and potentially stable relationship between formerly
antagonistic persons or groups. Reconciliation is the process of developing a mutually
acceptable accommodation generally followed by a rupture in the relationship like extreme
violence. Coexistence needs aspects like equality, interdependence and interaction, where
no party dominates the other and does not exploit other groups’ members (1998a).
Moreover, reconciliation should not be taken as surrender.
Kriesberg notes that after severe struggles, it is not probable that all the members of
the adversary parties reconcile universally; still official reconciliation is achievable.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

17

Reconciliation needs antagonist parties to acknowledge the dreadful aspects and the
suffering of the past. In order to contribute to reconciliation the truths should be
recognised, the justice attained, well-being of the threatened community improved, and
apologies, forgiveness and mourning expressed. Practices and policies that serve to a
common purpose of the previously adversary communities are one of the accelerating
factors of reconciliation. Redressing of former crimes through public trials is a contributing
factor for an equitable coexistence and reconciliation. Hence one policy alone cannot be
effective to reach and maintain an equitable coexistence and reconciliation; there should be
a combination of policies implemented in coordination (1998a).
Intractable conflicts can only end if rivals regularly negotiate their differences and
rely on nonviolent means even if they exercise coercion. Kriesberg sets three features that
allow conflicts to become tractable. First the rival parties should recognize substantial
mutual interests, second considerable number of members of each rival group should
acknowledge a minimum level of human rights for the other side, and third the adversaries
should agree to use nonviolent means no matter if they pursue conflict or try to settle the
conflict. Tractability of conflict is linked with changes in relationship between adversaries
and changes within the adversary groups as well as in the external setting (1998b).
For the subordinated party of the conflict, means other than violence often are more
effective and enduring. Using nonviolent means likes protests, drawing the involvement of
outside allies, as well as offering security to basic interest of the dominant party are among
other means to establish a peaceful relation with the dominant party. For the dominant
party, strategies to abolish intractability include acknowledging the suffering of the
subordinated group, developing mechanisms to handle conflict and claims of injustice, as
well as controlling each party’s hardliners (Kriesberg, 1998b).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

18

Management of protracted social conflicts necessitates taking issues of economic
development and communal pluralism highly into consideration, since peace requires
stable economic and political development. Identity based conflicts cannot be resolved
without the consideration of developmental needs of the communities involved (Azar,
2002). Conflicts cannot be transformed unless basic human needs of one or both parties are
satisfied (Zartman, 1997).
In the field of conflict resolution the goal should not be to eliminate conflict at all.
This thought has two sources, first it is impossible to remove conflicts as a whole, second it
could be probably damaging. The objective should be rather to eliminate the violent
conflict and its manifestations. In order to transform a conflict situation, the parties
involved must be transformed as well, so as not to nurture conditions for the reproduction
of the conflict. As Galtung puts it, there will not be an ultimate peace in the world, in his
own words “[w]hat may happen is a better balance between peace and violence, meaning
more and better peace and less and ‘better’ (less evil) violence – a betterment of the human
condition… The task of peace studies is…: not unrealistic total triumphs of good over evil,
but better deals, with less suffering, from violence…” (1996: 17).
A genuine conflict resolution effort should address fundamental needs and deepest
fears of the affected people. Once these needs of warring parties have been satisfied and
fears are alleviated, the issues concerning territory and resources can be settled through
bargaining. Conflict resolution does not mean that historical grievances and traumas are
simply forgotten, but it refers to a process that addresses the key needs and fears of
affected societies and builds a permanent mechanism to confront these needs and fears
(Kelman, 1997). Conflict resolution efforts should seek possibilities and paths for change
and identify the appropriate conditions for change by being capable to overcome barriers
and resistance to change. Conflict settlement strategies must address the root causes of

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

19

conflict, since its disregard should lead to the invalidation of the settlement in case of any
unexpected incident.
In some conflict cases a third party interferes to contribute to the reconciliation
process. The intervention of a third party creates a triangle of relationship. This process can
complicate as well as facilitate the reconciliation. Third parties also have an interest in
ending the conflict, where at the same time some external parties have an interest in
continuing the conflict. Even the humanitarian agencies have an interest “in defending
their own efforts and profession by bringing conflict away from violence and toward
resolution” (Zartman, 1997: 13). Conflict resolution attempts therefore should highly
concentrate on analysing where the interests of external and internal parties to the conflict
lie.
2.3. Nonviolent Action
The strategies of nonviolent action vary extremely. A key strategy is the public
assembly of large number of people that gather for demonstrations and marches by giving
officials the signal of their capacity for disturbance. Gandhi’s satyagraha movement
depending upon nonviolent resistance to injustice and Indian independence stands out as
another strategy for active nonviolence. Nonviolent movements of the later twentieth
century common in Europe and North America have three characteristics. First the reliance
on resistance to violence gives actors a moral advantage. Second, the authorities’ response
to nonviolent movements put them in a morally and politically disadvantaged place. Third,
nonviolent activists use the media extensively to spread their messages (Gurr and Davies,
2002).
It is obvious that there is not the same investment made in order to raise the
capacity of the society to transform conflicts as is made to instigate conflict. The fact that
people cannot give examples of nonviolent conflict resolution does not mean that these do

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

20

not exist (Brand-Jacobsen, 2004). Nonviolent tools for conflict transformation include
nonviolent protests, non-cooperation and the reduction of relations.
Some leaders of nonviolent campaigns assert that committing violence diminishes
the possibility of future negotiation and reconciliation. They argue pursuing nonviolent
struggle raises the chance for the later attainment of an enduring peace and mutually
acceptable conditions (Kriesberg, 1997).
Galtung responses to the assertion ‘nonviolence does not work’ with amazing
success stories from the twentieth century. Citing some of them: (1) Gandhi’s swaraj
campaign for Indian independence from 1920, (2) Martin Luther King Jr.’s campaign in
the US from 1956, (3) Buenos Aires Plaza de Mayo mothers against the military, (4)
‘People’s Power’ movement in the Philippines in 1986, (5) Intifada movement in Occupied
Palestine from 1987, (6) Solidarność/DDR movements that ended the Cold War (1996).
2.4. Non-governmental Organisations and Their Function in Conflict Resolution
Work
The UN defines NGOs as non-profit entities whose members are citizens of one or
more countries. The activities of an NGO are defined by the collective will of its members
as a response to the needs of the members of one or more communities, which the NGO
cooperates with. Nevertheless, there is no universally accepted definition of NGOs. NGOs
try to change societal norms, challenge national governments and establish transnational
alliances. Currently, there are 2.013 NGOs in consultative status with the UN Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Governments have become encouraged to work with NGOs in the field of
humanitarian aid and conflict resolution in the post Cold-War era. According to Andrew S.
Natsios, one of the reasons of this fact is that the increase in the number of power centres
led governments to turn to NGOs that are capable of functioning as mediators at the

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

21

community level in areas of conflict. NGOs can have four different functions to work in
conflict zones: they can monitor human rights abuses, they can act as impartial mediators
between warring groups, they can provide humanitarian aid and they can influence foreign
policy decisions taken in western countries. Yet it is obvious that one NGO cannot deal
with all these four functions (1997).
In the case of an entirely collapsed government, NGOs may act as sources of
authority. In some cases, NGOs are the only actors to perform some essential tasks for the
implementation of peace processes, since government services might have been destroyed
or impaired. In these situations, NGOs provide services in demining operations,
resettlement of refugees, provision of public services, construction of shelters, agricultural
rehabilitation and health services. NGOs can be considered as the best early warning
mechanisms of imminent conflicts. On the other hand, the existence of international NGOs
(INGO) in conflict situations may make warring parties feel restrained to commit human
rights abuses; therefore NGOs’ presence can act as a preventive factor (Natsios, 1997).
On the other hand, these outside actors who function as role-players in international
relief efforts in the violence-torn areas can unintentionally cause many complications in the
negotiation process where they can also help diminishing the violence and contribute to the
peace process. Providing resources into a conflict environment where resources are scarce
usually creates competition over aid between antagonists (Natsios, 1997).
P.J. Simmons defines four ways that NGOs influence external parties: they set the
agenda, they negotiate outcomes, they confer legitimacy and they execute solutions (1998).
In 1997, the campaign to conclude a treaty banning landmines won the Nobel Prize. This
was the result of a partnership between the Canadian government and over 350
humanitarian NGOs from 23 countries. What is more interesting was the international
media campaign they used utilizing tools like the Internet, e-mails, newsletters and even

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

22

comic books. Thus some US policymakers noted that the NGO coalition could have gained
US support if it had been more patient and open to compromise. Another example; in 1990
an Italian NGO, the Comunità di Sant’Egidio initiated informal meetings between
antagonists in Mozambique that led to a peace agreement. NGOs working particularly on
humanitarian and development issues are able achieving results in working on the ground
that governments are not able or hesitate. This fact is linked with NGOs’ perceived
impartiality and experience. One study on NGOs and peace-building in Bosnia criticised
NGOs how they used advertising in order to promote their programs to potential donors.
This kind of advertising was first causing concerns about local reconstruction efforts,
second raising questions on NGOs’ preferences to use money. In other conflict areas such
as Ethiopia and Rwanda, the roads and camps for humanitarian assistance was used by
combatants. In Sudan and Somalia, NGOs made direct and indirect payments to factions in
order to have access to areas in need (Simmons, 1998). Nevertheless, the idea that UN and
the nation states depend on NGOs’ work to achieve results at the grassroots level is
universally acceptable.
Making the assessment of nation states’ record in working with NGOs, countries
like Canada and Norway stand out as significant cases for establishing alliances with
NGOs, while US is very poor in establishing relations in areas of arms control. Norway has
funded NGO coalition for the International Criminal Court (ICC); and states like Bosnia
and Sierra Leone, received support from legal advisors at the ICC negotiations, provided
by the NGO called No Peace Without Justice. In the NGO sector, there remains the
problem of representing the society in large. That means, even if the NGOs choose their
representatives from among themselves, there is no guarantee that the selected ones truly
represent the society at large and its interests. Simmons concludes by asserting that it is
feared that NGOs would become indebted to national governments due to dependence on

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

23

public funding. Plans to increase NGO involvement are also due to lead to lost of passion
and impoverishment of ideas, subsequently to generate predictable and bureaucratic
approaches among NGO representatives (Simmons, 1998).
Two prominent examples of NGOs working on peace and conflict resolution are
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) and International Crisis
Group (ICG). SIPRI, founded in 1966 by the Swedish Parliament conducts researches on
peace and disarmament. ICG established in 1995 focuses on crisis management and
humanitarian emergencies and uses the tools of fieldwork, policy analysis and advocacy
(Simmons, 1998).
2.5. Second Track Diplomacy as a Field
First coined by Joseph Montville and pioneered by him and Edward Azar, John
McDonald, John Burton, Johan Galtung, Herbert Kelman, Leonard Doob, Harold
Saunders, Vamık D. Volkan, Ronald Fisher, Christopher Mitchell and Michael Banks,
second track diplomacy is defined as:
… the bringing together of professionals, opinion leaders or other currently or potentially
influential individuals from communities in conflict, without official representative status, to
work together to understand better the dynamics underlying the conflict and how its
transformation from violence (or potential violence) to a collaborative process of peacebuilding and sustainable development might be promoted (Davies and Kaufman, 2002: 2).

According to Kriesberg, unofficial diplomacy started to become increasingly
important in the beginning of 1950s. As a significant case, in 1957 nuclear physicists
began to meet discussing reducing the chances to use nuclear weapons. The exchange of
ideas at these meetings led to signing of a number of treaties on non-proliferation (1997).
Terms to describe non-official diplomatic processes include second track or track
two diplomacy, citizenship or citizens’ diplomacy, unofficial diplomacy, interactive
problem-solving, interactive conflict resolution, field diplomacy, third-party consultation,
multi track diplomacy and facilitated dialogues. Second track diplomacy should be
considered as an independent non-governmental mechanism that contributes to security by
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

24

using nonviolent means of conflict resolution. It perceives the individual as a means for
change in policies and actions of the prevalent system. It considers that citizens from
various backgrounds possessing various skills have something to add to peace-building
processes. The characteristics and functions of second track diplomacy can be summarised
in following headings:
It complements official diplomacy:
It supports first track diplomacy by making suggestions and introducing alternative
ways for solution. Inevitably, peace agreements must be negotiated, finalised and executed
at the official level, thus citizens’ diplomacy does not aim to be an alternative system of
official diplomacy; it is a complementary system that uses opportunities that are not
available at the official level. Second track diplomacy engages the civil society, which is a
compulsory aspect to successfully implement peace agreements. Nevertheless,
practitioners of unofficial diplomacy do not try to impose any conflict settlement; they
merely facilitate the whole process of conflict transformation by creating the sense of
shared responsibility among opposing fractions (Davies and Kaufman, 2002).
Track two diplomacy transforms traditional diplomacy settings into “win-win”,
where the cooperation and mutual progress are maximised (Azar, 2002). When official
negotiations are in progress, unofficial initiatives particularly problem-solving workshops
provide a forum to seek options that a more agreeable at the negotiation process and to find
out ways to break stalemates (Kelman, 2002). Track two may prepare the appropriate
conditions for official negotiations or negotiations that were started at the unofficial level.
When official negotiations reach an impasse, track two channel can open informally, which
can be later transferred into the official level (Kriesberg, 1997).
It opens up opportunities for communication:

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

25

When official dialogue becomes constrained or blocked, second track diplomacy
explores how the needs of adversaries should be handled. It promotes reconciliation
between those critical divides that thwart the process of conflict transformation. These
divides include divisions between civil society and government, between elites and
grassroots members and among people possessing different approaches on resolving
conflicts. Along with states, track two diplomacy acknowledges non-state groups that are
based on identity. It promotes dialogue across all levels of leadership (i.e. top-level, midlevel and grassroots) (Davies and Kaufman, 2002). In addition, second track actors serve as
neutral parties establishing a bridge between divided societies. In most of the cases
unofficial settings are the only safe and non-binding environments where opposing parties
can meet (Rasmussen, 1997).
The practitioner-experts of track two diplomacy propose, discuss or seek alternative
solutions to a dispute (Azar, 2002). The process of finding alternative solutions to
problems contributes to establishing a new relationship between parties (Kelman, 2002).
Contributes to humanisation of the enemy:
It reduces tension and misperceptions between groups in opposition. Facilitated
face-to-face communication as a tool of second track diplomacy opens channels for the
(re)humanisation of the enemy (Davies and Kaufman, 2002). Problem-solving workshops
help participating individuals to overcome suspicions and fear that stand in the way of
official negotiations. Becoming aware of other party’s concerns, priorities and limits,
individuals create a belief on the possibility of a peaceful solution.
Builds capacity of the civil society:
By involving the civil society, second track diplomacy processes open alternative
ways for the evolution of the democratic political culture. Since wars and violent conflicts
of today have more impact on civilian life than it has on states’ armed forces, unofficial

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

26

diplomacy engages those who are directly affected by the negative consequences of the
conflict in the search for peace (Davies and Kaufman, 2002).
Establishes public support and political will for peacemaking and long-term structural
development:
Informal encounters contribute to the development of a political atmosphere
inclined to negotiations and other diplomatic undertakings. The ideas for solution emerging
from unofficial settings are more likely to respond to real needs and fears of antagonist
parties; in addition parties to the conflict feel more committed to these alternative solutions
they created themselves (Kelman, 2002). Second track diplomacy emphasizes long-term
goals that address the needs of all parties that were engaged in conflict.

Track two diplomacy aims at transforming protracted conflict and its related
institutions and power dynamics into a process of long-term, viable and constructive
commitment and collective problem-solving. It accepts the concept of positive peace
achieved through social and economic justice, participatory democracy and sustainable
development supported by structural transformation. Like conflict resolution focuses on
preventing or resolving conflict through addressing the root causes of conflict, track two
diplomacy aspires to transform violent and stalemated relations into constructive relations
through dealing with the root causes of conflict (Davies and Kaufman, 2002).
Track two diplomacy practitioners are usually former state officials, psychologists,
lawyers, peace activists, journalists and social scientists. Track two processes engage
academics, NGO professionals, religious leaders, women’s group leaders and humanitarian
assistance leaders from different communities at the mid-level and civil society level. The
next step is the conveying the new insights for the peace process to the top-level leaders.
At this stage of the process, attempts are made to engage those leaders in dialogue with the

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

27

civil society representatives. Though it is very common that leaders at different levels do
not acknowledge their interdependence with others. For example, the representatives at the
grassroots level are not regarded for dialogue as well; therefore they tend to remain
isolated from other levels. For this reason track two diplomacy targets to promote dialogue
across these three levels of leadership (Davies and Kaufman, 2002).
Former government officials who are involved in unofficial diplomatic processes
usually serve in think-tanks and academic institutions. They may preserve the advantage to
have access to certain individuals at the decision making level. Other advantage they have
may be their close ties with key opinion leaders, columnists of major newspapers or key
persons at the news media. The position of former diplomats serving as citizen diplomats
plays a crucial role in making the link and securing the information flow between track one
and two diplomacy.
Practitioners working in the field of second track diplomacy need to develop many
skills particularly the skill to displace their own cultural preconceptions. Another particular
skill to be gained is not to concentrate too much on the transfer of their expertise (Davies
and Kaufman, 2002), since the fact that the skills of third party facilitators are often from
western cultures would lead to their rejection by local communities. Due to this fact, it is
advised that the process of second track diplomacy is co-facilitated by practitioners from
the local community in question. Azar considering that practitioners of alternative
diplomacy processes come from western political and economic cultures proposes that they
should continuously check their inclinations. Another proposal is that western oriented
practitioners should train those from non-western traditions and include them in facilitation
processes (2002).
The practitioners and participants of second track diplomacy process have a duty
for maintaining the private and confidential nature of the forum, since the success of it—

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

28

even the lives of participants—may be under risk. Those participants must be screened out
who seek personal and intra-group gain by intelligence gathering or those who aim to
publicise the event (Azar, 2002).
In post-conflict situations, the peace workers or post-conflict monitoring staff who
work on the ground are inevitably more familiar with the needs and dynamics of the
current situation than official diplomats. These highly informed field workers are better
equipped to set more appropriate and workable goals than those who work in central
offices. Each organisation makes its own decision whether to initiate tasks in a conflicttorn area, on the other hand they depend upon resources to implement their planned
activities. Increasingly NGOs are given missions by international bodies like the European
Commission to perform tasks particularly in the post-conflict reconstruction phase
(Chayes and Chayes, 1998).
Kriesberg in his article on communal reconciliation states that social institutions
can provide the appropriate setting for the interaction between previously antagonist
groups in the reconciliation process. These settings provide for those the conditions for
experiencing equal status and prejudice reduction. A considerable amount of reconciliation
work is conducted on an individual basis. It is also conducted on small group level in
settings such as schools, workplaces mainly on grassroots level. Kriesberg divides agents
for coexistence and reconciliation into three, these are: high-ranking leaders, middle-range
leaders or grassroots leaders. In this classification, middle-range and grassroots leaders
depict the representatives of second track diplomacy. These leaders in Kriesberg’s
conception are either based inside or outside the antagonist groups (1998a).
Internal middle-range leaders include religious, business and political leaders,
intellectuals, artists, and journalists. They mend inter-personal bonds through organising
problem-solving workshops and establish monitoring mechanisms. External middle-range

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

29

leaders include representatives from INGOs conducting humanitarian and development
assistance, human rights advocacy and direct peace-building work. Diaspora communities
play a considerable role either in sustaining communal conflicts or in resolving these
hostilities by providing necessary resources. They attempt to influence policies in the
country they reside to necessitate government’s intervention either to help one party of the
conflict or to end the vicious cycle of the conflict, or to act as a mediator for the resolution
of the conflict (Kriesberg, 1998a).
Grassroots leaders from the locality often try to attain greater justice for the local
people. Women, peasants or other residents consider inter-communal conflict as a threat to
their lives; hence they promote policies of reconciliation. External grassroots contributions
refer to a variety of transnational social movement organisations or citizens groups running
programs like social exchanges. In order to have enduring reconciliation, Kriesberg puts
forth leaders at all levels should reinforce each other (1998a). Figure 2 exhibits John Paul
Lederach’s triangle of actors and their approaches to peace-building, that summarizes the
role played by three types of actors in a comprehensive way.
Types of actors

Approaches to Building Peace

Level 1: Top leadership
Military/political/religious leaders
with high sensibility

Focus on high-level negotiations.
Emphasize cease-fire. Led by
highly visible, single mediator.

Level 2: Middle-range leadership
Leaders respected in sectors.
Ethnic/religious leaders.
Academics/intellectuals.
Humanitarian leaders (NGOs).

Problem-solving workshops.
Training in conflict resolution.
Peace commissions.
Insider-partial teams.

Level 3: Grassroots leadership
Local leaders. Leaders of
indigenous NGOs. Community
developers. Local health officials.
Refugee camp leaders.

Local peace commissions.
Grassroot training.
Prejudice reduction.
Psychosocial work in postwar
trauma.

Figure 2. Actors and Approaches to Peace-building
Source: Lederach, 2001: 146

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

30

Shonholtz puts particular emphasis on civil society’s role in managing disputes in
Central and Eastern European countries. Since 1989, an organisation called Partners for
Democratic Change (Partners) has founded national centers for conflict resolution at
universities in Moscow, Warsaw, Prague, Bratislava, Budapest and Sofia. One of the goals
of Partners was to establish mediating structures in civil society through setting up ethnic
conciliation commissions. Partners started discussions with minority leaders, and local and
governmental officials to address the issues related with minorities and to create civil
society structures to deal with these issues. Shonholtz argues that minority conflicts have a
remarkable function in new democracies since successful management of conflicts serves
to promote democracy. Conciliation commissions’ experience has led to clarification of
values, expression of disagreements and understanding the consequences of the conflict.
Once the dialogue started on options for change, the conflict parties stopped discussing the
historical conditions. Shonholtz claims that societies broken by ethnic and national
conflicts lacking neutral intermediaries need to discover ways to establish efficient dispute
resolution systems (1998).
According to Mitchell and Banks, conflict resolution organisations would be
acceptable to governments, but not directly funded by them. When starting a peacemaking
effort the parties to the conflict always direct the question: ‘who is paying you for this?’
This fact gives the signal that any problem-solving exercise supported with government
funds will give the impression of an attempt that tries to further national interests. This fact
is applicable to foundations or other types of organisations that have linkages with
activities that parties to the conflict regard biased. To this particular problem, Mitchell and
Banks propose practitioners working in this field “to be extremely wary of their funding
sources, to eschew government funding and to be completely open with parties in conflict
about ‘where the money comes from’” (1996: 86-87). In addition, Andrea L. Strimling

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

31

notes that the transparency of organizers and funding agencies about funding is a crucial
element of the work. Being ethically as well practically important, the discovery of
unrevealed information undermine the whole conflict resolution process (2002).
2.6. Interactive Problem-Solving Approach as a Tool for Unofficial Diplomacy
The tool of interactive problem-solving termed as well as interactive conflict
resolution applied by many scholar-practitioners is described as an academic based process
with an unofficial third-party approach bringing together representatives of opposing
parties in conflict for establishing and maintaining direct communication. This tool should
be considered as an integral part of the larger diplomatic process (Fisher 2002; Kelman,
2002). A problem-solving initiative “involves the principle of putting adversaries in a
situation where they can explore the possibilities for new options leading to a ‘win-win’, or
variable sum solution to what can be recognized as a mutual problem” (Mitchell and
Banks, 1996:5).
Problem-solving process “uses the individual as the unit of analysis in the effort to
understand resistance to change in a conflict relationship despite changes in realities and
interests, and in the search for solutions that would satisfy the human needs of the parties”;
moreover it is an attempt to achieve change at the level of individuals (Kelman, 2002: 96).
In other words, this process depicts a micro-process that transfers inputs into the macroprocess of conflict resolution (Kelman, 1997). The principle here is to start the process “at
the bottom social level and move upwards” considering “no settlement can work unless it
is acceptable to those affected by it” (Mitchell and Banks, 1996: 32).
The objective of interactive problem-solving is not to promote communication as
an end, rather to make solutions emerge out of the interaction between opposing parties.
One other objective of the problem-solving workshops is to generate and transfer the
inputs into the political decision-making and debate processes. In a broader sense,

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

32

interactive problem-solving aims at creating a political environment inclined to conflict
resolution and transforming the relations between rival communities both in the short and
long term. In general the workshops try either to bring parties to the formal negotiation
table or to have the officials run more productive negotiations if they are already at the
table (Kelman, 2002).
Problem-solving workshops can be described as informal and unofficial settings
with the characteristic of neutrality. Facilitated by a group of social scientists, problemsolving workshops try to achieve inter-personal thrust, through improving relations at the
grassroots level and influencing representatives of opposing groups. Facilitators are
supposed to create an environment for constructive dialogue in order to initiate a
constructive process of accommodation (Azar, 2002). The timing is one of the important
issues in problem-solving attempts. The parties will be willing to interact with each other
when they have reached the point of stalemate or exhaustion. The ideal time to intervene
should also be the preliminary phase before the possible worsening of the conflict
(Mitchell and Banks, 1996).
Interactive problem-solving workshops have several functions. Among them are the
function of contributing to the official pre-negotiation process, the attempt to remove
barriers that stand in the way of opening negotiations and the function of seeking
alternative solutions that are not yet on the table. For this reason, unofficial forums are
meant to be complementing to official negotiations, rather than to rehearse or simulate
negotiations (Kelman, 2002). At this stage, the line between official negotiation process
and problem-solving process should be made visible. Problem-solving forums are not
intended to facilitate formal negotiation processes directly, rather they facilitate the
communication helping opposing parties to overcome their political, technical and
psychological barriers.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

33

A typical workshop has five characteristics. First it is a private, informal and
confidential gathering in a safe environment without the attendance of observers.
Discussions are not recorded, though third party individuals can make notes. Participants
should feel they could deviate from their conflict norms. The principle of confidentiality
can prevail until the workshop group decides that it is appropriate time to make the
outcome public. Second the participants of contending parties are politically influential
people, though they are not directly involved in the execution of foreign policy. There are
times that participants are encouraged by the political leadership to attend the workshop.
Third, participants enter into the workshop settings as individuals rather official
representatives. Nevertheless, the closer the participants are to formal foreign policy
making centre, the more opportunity there is to transfer the workshop experience into
official decision making processes. At the same time, those participants closer to the power
centre possibly feel more constrained and rigid in entering into open communication.
Fourth, workshops have a non-binding character; it is much easier for participants to
engage in noncommittal communication, which is a necessary condition for innovative
problem-solving. Fifth, the practice of problem-solving does not function if parties are not
interested in changing the status quo. Both parties should have some interest in ending the
conflict with a mutually agreed upon agreement (Kelman, 2002).
In the pre-forum phase, the workshop environment and participants are selected,
the role of facilitators clarified and the setting prepared. In this phase, an inter-group needs
analysis is conducted since a separate dialogue is needed to address the groups’ differences
before the workshop starts. Purposes, procedures and ground rules are outlined at this stage
(Azar, 2002; Kelman, 2002). The process of selecting the participants should take into
account not to exclude any group that might attempt to undermine the outcome of the
workshop. That is to say: the removal of obstacles to changing extremist behaviour should

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

34

be the priority, rather than refusing extremists’ attendance in the problem-solving process.
Each group’s ‘doves’ as well as ‘hawks’ should be welcome as members of the forum.
‘Hawks’ should be included in the discussions at the early stages rather than later stages.
The participants should be able to represent their group’s feelings, considerations and
goals, as well as be aware of underlying interests and values and possible reactions and
obstacles to alternative solutions (Mitchell and Banks, 1996).
The location to conduct the workshop should be preferably somewhere that is apart
from the location of the conflict. In general the setting of the workshop should make the
participants feel comfortable, secure, safe and away from the day-to-day events of the
conflict (Mitchell and Banks, 1996). The workshop covers sessions for sharing each
party’s national identity, history of victimisation, ties to the land, sense of justice, fears and
concerns; sessions to generate positive-sum solutions, ways to overcome constraints and
concrete ideas for joint action (Kelman, 2002). Montville makes a particular emphasis on
the indispensability of regret and forgiveness in order to establish a new relationship in the
healing and reconciliation process. This process necessitates a joint analysis of the conflict
history and acknowledgement of injustices. In other words, understanding the history of
the conflict is necessary in order to move forward in the reconciliation process (Fisher,
1999). The forum setting is usually an academic one, since it encourages open discussion,
effective listening and an analytical approach. The discussion should be conducted not to
assign blames, but to investigate the reasons behind the conflict and its possible resolution
paths (Kelman, 2002).
One of the characteristics of interactive problem-solving workshops is to display
symmetries in the parties’ perceptions of each other. According to Kelman, the symmetries
tend to be a major source of conflict escalation, where in contrast they can function as a

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

35

major tool for de-escalation through providing parties the help for making them understand
each other’s point of view (2002).
The outputs of a workshop can be “a framework of mutually agreeable principles
for some settlement, a list of suggested tension-reducing… measures, a number of possible
formulae for dissolving impasse, or a proposal for a process by which official discussions
could begin” (Mitchell and Banks, 1996: 146).
In the early days, a single problem-solving workshop was the initial attempt of the
scholar-practitioners, though the complexity of many protracted conflicts has necessitated
sustained and long-term efforts to engender alternative solutions to the problems through
running a set of linked workshops. In this scope, there are three types of workshops; these
are single workshops, ad-hoc series and continuing workshops. The need of an ad-hoc
workshop arises from the demand of participants when they feel a meeting is useful and
desirable. Continuing workshops focus mainly on long-term causes and long-range
solutions of conflicts. At each gathering, the circle of participants can be widened or a new
set of participants can be associated into the process (Mitchell and Banks, 1996). Kelman
argues longer and continuing processes “make it possible to go beyond the sharing of
perspectives to the joint production of creative ideas”. The participants of the forum have
the chance to take the developed ideas to their communities, to receive their reactions and
to give feedback in the next meeting by making proposals to modify original ideas
(Kelman, 1998: 329).
The post-forum phase is the stage for the promotion of self-sustaining structural
development. At this stage, those participants seeking accommodation or those who appear
closely related with participants from the opposing party can be alienated from their
constituencies and can lose credibility (Azar, 2002; Kelman, 2002). In the longer term, the
workshop participants can discuss the possibility of starting symbolic bridge-building

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

36

activities, such as producing articles and papers, establishing new organisations or
maintaining channels of communication between participants (Mitchell and Banks, 1996).
In order to assess the effects of a problem-solving exercise one has to accept that
dramatic changes seldom happen after conducting the workshop, therefore the change in
the tone of public statements, the using of certain phrases, the easing of restrictions, the
adoption of new concepts, the utilisation of suggestions should be taken as typical success
indicators of workshops. Perhaps it will take many years until one is able finding out that
the problem-solving exercise had the intended impact (Mitchell and Banks, 1996).
The facilitation of problem working workshops seeks particular expertise and it has
its own characteristics. First rule is that facilitators should guarantee neutrality, whilst
considering that to have personal individual perceptions and ideological tendencies is
unavoidable (Azar, 2002). Therefore third party facilitators should always examine their
own motives at the start of the problem-solving process (Mitchell and Banks, 1996).
Facilitation should ensure that participants do not enter into a premature setting of
negotiation and bargaining. Facilitators should learn issues in advance including the
historical record and web of relations within and between opposing parties. The
facilitators’ level of knowledge is crucial for gaining the respect of participants (Azar,
2002). The initial analysis before convening a problem-solving workshop should take into
account the fact that academics, business people, journalists and diplomats could possess
vested interests in their interpretations. In addition, diasporas tend to have a different or out
of date view of the conflict. Diaspora members distant from the actual platform tend to
have more extreme views and stances and to be less knowledgeable about the conflict than
those directly engaged in the conflict who have to bear the cost of the conflict directly
(Mitchell and Banks, 1996). Therefore, in the process of problem-solving all the views
should be regarded with caution.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

37

2.7. Psychopolitical Approaches in Conflict Resolution
Vamık D. Volkan depicts the model called Tree Model developed at the University
of Virginia’s Center for the Study of Mind and Human Interaction. This model aims to
reduce tension between adversaries and promote democratisation and coexistence. The
model described as a process starts with a diagnosis of the problem by an interdisciplinary
facilitating team with unofficial capacity. These experts try to diagnose the situation on
location by having in-depth interviews with a variety of people including government
officials, civic leaders, journalists, scholars and average citizens. They examine the history,
culture of the adversaries and the current conflict situation. Visiting “hot” locations such as
cemeteries and memorials carrying symbols of the past sufferings add to the examination.
Defining “chosen traumas” and “chosen glories” 7 of rival groups is also a significant
factor in diagnosis work. Losses linked with chosen traumas cannot be mourned; hence the
humiliation and wounds remain unhealed. That explains why past traumas of some
communities are still active though many centuries have passed since the incidents
occurred. After gathering the data, hidden transcripts are to be found out, such as the
anxiety to “vanish” as an ethnic group or fear of foreign invasion (Volkan, 1998).
In the second phase selected participants from each group enter into psychopolitical
dialogues. There are two significant factors in these meetings. First participants from
opposing parties are influential members of their communities, second these members hold
no official status. During the dialogue process, it is necessary to leave participants the
space to express their chosen traumas and glories in a non-victorious way. Only when
opposing parties start to listen to each other, more concrete discussions can take place. It is
probable that opposing sides enthusiastically make a note of their mutual similarities.
7

“Chosen traumas refer to the shared mental representations of humiliating events where losses occurred.
Chosen glories recount the shared mental representations of events of success or triumph. The ‘memories’ of
both kinds of events are often mythologized and passed from generation to generation although chosen
traumas are typically stronger markers of a group’s identity than the mental representations of past glories”
(Volkan, 1998: 344)

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

38

Nevertheless this perceived togetherness causes anxiety, since crucial distinctions blur and
each rival party attempts to conserve its identity; each group can even try to exaggerate
minor differences. The facilitators reassure that reaching an agreement does not refer to the
loss of one group’s identity. Volkan states that, if an agreement is reached at the premature
closeness stage, it is most likely that it becomes broken at the later stage. Yet when
ambivalences start to occur in the opposing group, other party’s identity can be
acknowledged with its wholeness (1998).
Volkan puts great emphasis on the process of mourning what he explains as the
psychological response to a loss. When mourning is not made adaptively and negative
feelings and experiences are passed from generation to generation, the inability to mourn
can create shared fantasies such as the entitlement for revenge or the sense of victimisation
(1998). The suffered party can only forgive when its members have done significant
mourning. Therefore asking the participants to forgive those who caused the suffering
alone does not create the environment for reconciliation; hence the focus should be to
assist those in the process of mourning (Volkan, 1997). One other basic element to achieve
dialogue between adversaries is to divide the past and the present. Only when problems of
the past are distanced from present situation, present problems can be discussed more
realistically (Volkan, 1998).
In general, the psychopolitical dialogue meetings include five stages: first, decision
to enter into dialogue is taken; second, relations are mapped; third, relation dynamics are
examined for the will to change; fourth, various scenarios are designed to change relations;
and finally, scenarios are set in motion (Volkan, 1998). In order to institutionalise the
process the facilitating team contributes to the establishment of a local contact group
consisting of participants from each adversary group. This becomes necessary when the
fourth stage i.e. design of the scenarios is reached. Volkan proposes that the ultimate goal

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

39

of the contact group should be transformation into an NGO that envisions an inter-group
understanding and prevention of ethnic tension. It is vital for the local group to maintain
function when the facilitating team finishes its direct involvement (1998).
2.8. The Role of Women in Conflict Resolution
While protection of women is often used as a pretext of waging war, women
usually are not consulted about these issues. Women are seldom engaged in decisions that
lead to war. Hence the most common role women and girls play in violent conflicts is the
victimisation (Anderson, 2002b). Galtung trying to answer the question of “what upholds
war?” stresses among many factors, the ruling by the male gender of the human species
meaning patriarchy. Males tend toward violence more than women; and those who hold the
possession of arms act according to the old proverb “to the person with a hammer the
world looks like a nail” (Galtung, 1996: 5).
Throughout the development of the field of conflict resolution, feminist theory was
used as a source of ideas as well. Feminist theory underlined the contributions women
made in public and private life. In general feminist ideas were parallel with conflict
resolution and these ideas made valuable contributions to development of conflict
resolution (Kriesberg, 1997). According to Shelley Anderson, women’s strength for the
role in reconciliation lies in their good listening and communication skills, their
willingness to compromise, their extensive experience in problem-solving and their sense
of caring for people. Women act as peace educators in the family. Their networks of local
affairs make them alert for rumours on increasing tensions, influx of weapons or other
signs of potential violent conflict (1999).
International organisations start acknowledging the role of women in peacebuilding, conflict resolution and reconciliation. In October 2000, UNSC unanimously
passed the Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security. Through this resolution UNSC

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

40

has recognized that “gender perspectives and the special needs of women and girls must be
incorporated in conflict management and peace-building at all levels”. This resolution was
regarded “as a victory for the women’s movement and a culmination of decades of
struggle” (CFD, 2003:1). The resolution expressed concern that particularly women and
children as the vast majority are adversely affected by armed conflict and it was
reaffirming women’s important role in peace-building and in prevention and resolution of
conflicts. Therefore the resolution was urging member states to ensure women’s equal
participation in all efforts for the promotion and maintenance of peace and security and to
increase their role in decision-making in national, international and regional organizations
regarding prevention and resolution of conflicts. The resolution was calling all parties to
armed conflict to take special measures to protect women and girls from gender-based
violence, particularly rape in armed conflict situations (UNSC, 2000). In 2004, the
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) made particular emphasis on trafficking of
women and girls arising from armed conflict and in post-conflict situations. CSW called
for the promotion of mainstreaming of a gender perspective in conflict resolution and in
post-conflict peace-building. CSW stated that the implementation of peace agreements
should be “pursued with explicit attention to women’s full and equal participation and the
goal of gender equality” (2004).
There are NGOs that aim to empower women through active nonviolence. One of
them, the International Fellowship of Reconciliation (IFOR)’s Women Peacemakers
Program tries to achieve this goal by documenting and analysing women’s peace
initiatives, countering the serious lack of information on women’s peace work and
supporting the establishment of sustainable women networks. As reported by IFOR, in
Bosnia women from various religious communities work together to promote
reconciliation. In Colombia women work actively in communities that declared themselves

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

41

as peace zones where participation in the war is refused. In Sierra Leone and Liberia,
before elections women strongly demanded disarmament. In Sri Lanka, women provide
material aid and psychological healing for victims of violence. There are some
organizations confronted with the challenge to involve men in peace work as well
(Anderson, 2002b). An organization called the Sudanese Women’s Voice for Peace
promotes dialogue among different ethnic groups and guerrilla factions in Sudan. The
organization has also established underground links between women in North and South
Sudan (Anderson, 1999).
Mothers’ and widows’ activism in the field of peace has a special place in women’s
peace movement. One of the driving forces of mothers in partaking peace activities is their
desire to learn the fate of their disappeared adult children or other family members. One
other driving force is their attempt to prevent their children from being sent to war zones.
For example in Guatemala, the organization called National Coordination of Guatemalan
Widows campaigns against conscription of young men in order to impede them from
socialization into army culture. One other underlying factor is that women are
economically dependent on their sons (Anderson, 1999).
Many peace movements have not taken the issue of gender violence into their
agenda or have not associated a gender perspective in their work since it is regarded as
being solely a “women’s issue”. In fact “[t]he link between private gender violence and
public violence of war are rooted in a mind set where domination, control and the belief in
one group’s superiority and another’s inferiority are central. The thinking that gives rise to
armed conflict has its roots in gender and the unequal power relationship between men and
women” (Anderson, 2002b: 26). In conceptualisation of Galtung, “[t]o fight patriarchy
means fighting patriarchal cultures and structures and arriving at a more equitable powersharing between the genders” (1996: 5).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

42

A common problem still remains as women’s lack of access to political power and
political decision-making. Accordingly some women organisations try to gain access to
political power in order to implement their plans for peace and reconciliation. Gaining
political power is perceived as a necessity also to transform political structures into more
democratic forms that will serve indirectly peace activism (Anderson, 1999). For example,
in Africa women are not included in peace negotiations since warring leaders are
concerned from the fact that women are inclined to reconcile and compromise, as stated by
one UN representative (Hunt and Posa, 2001).
There are various other roles that women play in peacemaking. As an example
Ahmed Yusuf Farah informs that in Somaliland at the height of the civil war, women were
the only means for communication between antagonist clans, as they were allowed to cross
clan boundaries. Traditionally, women were exchanged to conclude a peace agreement.
Offering a marriageable partner to the rival clan meant symbolic compensation for the loss
of life in the case of bloodshed. As Farah asserts such traditions continue in Somaliland
and these have strengthened some peace treaties, such did when two rival clans provided
fifty eligible women for the other party (2001).
2.9. Multi Track Diplomacy as a Tool for Peacemaking and Conflict Resolution
Louise Diamond and McDonald who have been involved in programs also in
Cyprus have developed the concept of multi track diplomacy by considering the concept of
track two diplomacy no longer covered the scope, variety and depth of citizens’
involvement in peacemaking and peace-building processes. It presumes that war is also a
multi track attempt (1996). With the attempt to provide an entire picture, multi track
diplomacy consists of nine different tracks, where all tracks are interdependent and
interconnected with each other. Moreover each track plays a different role for the whole
system.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

43

Track one: Government (peacemaking through diplomacy)
This track includes the state, military, governmental and inter-governmental
organisations. State is the primary unit of the international system and the legitimate tool
of coercive power. Official diplomacy is bureaucratic and male dominated; it prioritises
using power to solve short-term crises. Official secrecy, elitism, fear of dialogue and
negotiation, and lack of skills for conflict resolution are primary characteristics of track
one diplomacy (Davies and Kaufman, 2002). When the state is confronted with protracted
social conflict, accommodation strategies are generally perceived as a sign of defeat.
Commonly, the state prefers to use coercive repression in order separate or divert the
opposition (Azar, 2002).
Formal diplomats speak for and represent their governments. When they feel their
personal opinions are in deep contradiction with official policy, they leave their jobs. The
governments’ isolation from the public leads to its mystification in the realm of expertise.
Though, the expertise in the field of peace and conflict resolution lays outside the
government community (Diamond and McDonald, 1996).
In Jan Van Eck’s opinion track one diplomacy interveners aim at bringing an end to
violent conflict in the quickest possible way that guarantees prime-time coverage on
mainstream media; they do not have the time and mandate to establish durable peace. They
force opposing parties to sign peace agreements regardless of their readiness. On the other
hand track one players do not have the time to conduct an intensive conflict analysis like
second track has (2001).
States are generally critical of unofficial problem-solving approach, since it is
considered as necessitating a long period that is not able to stop war. Another critical point
is the lack of agreement to end the war at the end of the process, that is an expected
outcome of improved communication and relationship building (Paffenholz, 2001). In the

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

44

case of coercive official diplomacy where there is no plan for trying to reach a mutually
agreed durable peace, track two diplomats cannot effectively play their role, or even worse
they cannot play any role at all (Van Eck, 2001).
Track two: Nongovernmental/ professional (peacemaking through conflict resolution)
According to Diamond and McDonald’s identification, track two diplomacy refers
to “nongovernmental citizen interactions between parties to a conflict, often but not always
with the presence and assistance of a third party”. Not strategic interests, but basic human
needs set the agenda (1996: 37). The track is dominated by males with few people of
colour nevertheless the field grows with more women and young people involved as
scholars and practitioners. The biggest concern of the field is scarcity of funding since
donor agencies demand measurable results in a pre-defined time frame.
Kelman, having an extensive experience on the issue of Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has worked in the pre-negotiation and early negotiation phases of the Oslo agreement. He
and his colleagues were able for helping to establish the basis of the Oslo agreement by
supporting the process with the development of the framework, ideas and political
conditions conducive to moving to negotiations (Kelman, 2002).
Track three: Business (peacemaking through commerce)
The involvement of the business community in conflict resolution work poses a
necessity since peacemaking efforts create more stable conditions for business operations.
The assumption is that there cannot be successful business operations without the existence
of peace. The business organisations that operate in the field of arms production or those
sectors that directly or indirectly benefit from the existence of war should be excluded
from this assumption.
With the rise of the concept of corporate social and environmental responsibility,
the business community has the alternative to support schooling, health services, training

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

45

and development related activities. The international business community operating in
countries where there is unrest or high risk of armed conflict can directly or indirectly
carry messages and ideas between opposing parties. Diamond and McDonald argue “[t]he
line between responsibility and profitability has been shifting over the last decade” and
they recommend the business community to increase its consciousness on the critical role
it can play in the field of conflict resolution (1996: 55-56). In other words, business
community has to find the way to balance profitability with social responsibility.
There are cases where academic institutions cooperate with the business
community by transferring their knowledge in the field of conflict management. As an
example, University of Maryland’s Center for International Development and Conflict
Management has helped the international business community to invest in local
communities in order to ease the tension and reduce the possibility of instability that may
be obstructing factor for their own activities (Davies and Kaufman, 2002). There are also
cases where business people have a personal history with social activism that serves as a
motivating factor to become involved in peace-building issues.
Jonas Moberg proposes five principles for corporate sector to engage in conflict
prevention and resolution processes. First the leadership of the company needs to establish
policies and guidelines in this field. Second the company should assess the impact of its
activities and conflict-related risks. Third the corporate sector should engage in dialogue
with key stakeholder groups. Fourth the business sector should establish transparent
partnerships with other companies, the civil society and governmental organisations for
collective action. Fifth the sector should be transparent in its transactions and should
identify its success indicators for assessing its operations’ social, environmental and
economic impacts (2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

46

Track four: Private citizens (peacemaking through personal involvement)
This group represents organisations running exchange programs or development
programs, advocacy groups, professional interest groups, voluntary organisations,
democracy building institutions or individuals with no organisational connection.
Representatives of this track are mostly from the middle class with the involvement of
large number of women. These people possess an enthusiastic force for changing the
community, its norms and ultimately the policies (Diamond and McDonald, 1996).
Among examples are organisations that train international groups on the techniques
of nonviolent protest, institutes that run programs on conflict resolution in schools or
organisations involved in disaster relief or refugee protection.
Track five: Research, training and education (peacemaking through learning)
This track includes a variety of research institutes, think-tanks, study programs and
educational programs from kindergartens to Ph.D. programs. The academia and thinktanks are mainly male dominated, though more women are expected to be active in this
field as the next generation professionals. Think-tanks are engaged in making research and
analysis on particular conflicts. They share their analyses, strategic models and policy
recommendations through meetings and publications or by joining television or radio
programs. Representatives of think-tanks have often access to track one diplomacy giving
them the advantage to inform and influence officials at decision-making levels. On the
other hand academic institutions give more attention to the process of learning, developing
methods and raising practical skills (Diamond and McDonald, 1996).
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict, International Peace Research
Institute of Oslo (PRIO), Initiative on Conflict Resolution and Ethnicity (INCORE) based
in Northern Ireland and the International Peace Research Association based in Denmark
are among track five organisations.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

47

Track six: Activism (peacemaking through advocacy)
Peace movements between 1970 and 1985 were manifested in traditional ways
using tools such as mass public demonstrations, whereas they took the form of civil
disobedience as well. In the early 1980s peace movement actions renewed including
political mobilisation and political pressure (Kriesberg, 1997).
Activism focuses on opposing to those actions and policies that are oppressive,
immoral or harmful for peace, therefore it separates from citizens’ diplomacy, whose focus
is increase understanding. In this track, there are leading transnational organisations like
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. The organisations or individuals engaged
in this field are justice, value and nonviolence oriented. Representatives of the field
conduct a continuous struggle against injustice, violence, cruelty and oppression, where
they often exercise civil obedience and become arrested. They conduct activities on
education, advocacy, organisation, support, witnessing and protests. They are easily
labelled as being unpatriotic and they become harassed by the police, individuals and
government officials, hence leading activist organisations have close ties with government
officials and the media. Lack of power still remains as a challenging factor. One of the
factors that makes the activism field a relevant partner in peacemaking efforts is its
enormous knowledge in people’s lives and needs at the grassroots level (Diamond and
McDonald, 1996).
Track seven: Religion (peacemaking through faith in action)
This track represents different religious and spiritual faith groups that seek to bring
moral laws of god for peace on earth. The significant characteristic of this track is its
tremendous population where believers all around the world contribute to peace work.
Various religious communities have the most extensive networks in conflict areas. For
example, Christian churches and its denominations have networks of active members in

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

48

every corner of the world. The representatives of this group use public education, relief and
development work, protests and behind-the-scenes discussions as tools for their cause
(Diamond and McDonald, 1996).
Among examples of faith-based organisations are the Quakers’ American Friends
Service Committee and the Mennonite Central Committee, called as “peace churches” that
have led NGOs in both development and implementation of conflict resolution work at the
community level. Other faith-based organisations such as World Vision and Catholic
Relief Services are taking major steps to review their roles in conflict mediation. Since
some conflicts erupt because of religious divides, mobilising religious organisations in
such conflicts for problem-solving work could be damaging (Natsios, 1997).
Track eight: Funding (peacemaking through providing resources)
The primary task of this track is to provide financial resources for peacemaking and
conflict resolution work. In this field there are four different types of organisations. First
large foundations, second smaller and progressive foundations, third individuals who
provide funds independently, and finally foundations, that support operational programs
instead of providing money. Security studies, area studies and public policy issues receive
the majority of the funds. Some of the funders focus on projects to educate and influence
decision makers. Progressive foundations prefer supporting activities in grassroots
empowerment, activism and social justice. There are only a few donors that provide
funding for peace education and media related issues. In this track, Hewlett Foundation
stands out as a significant example, since thirteen universities in the US have received
ongoing institutional support for developing theory and practice in the field of conflict
resolution since 1984 (Diamond and McDonald, 1996).
There are three controversial issues in this track. First there is always a possibility
that some of the funders are eager to use their power for ideological or other hidden

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

49

purposes. Second, some of the donors should have accumulated their wealth through
business practices that exploited both the people and the environment. Third, the grant
seeking organisations should possibly distort their planned activities according to donors’
priorities in order to guarantee funding.
Track nine: Communications and the media (peacemaking through information)
Diamond and McDonald define this track as composed of three categories: news
media, educational media and the electronic communications media. The first group
represents the mainstream and alternative media, the second educational television, radio
programs and publications on peace, and the third basically the Internet (1996). The upperclass male dominated mainstream media is inevitably not interested in presenting peace
related issues as these issues are considered as news-unworthy. On the other hand the
alternative media and independent producers are more creative, more courageous and more
willing to get into controversial issues related with peace and conflict resolution. There is
less competition in the alternative media as well.
This is the most troublesome track in the whole multi track system, since it
possesses the power to distort and control the content it distributes to the world public,
where hidden agendas may be the dominating factor in making decisions what to present in
the media and what not. Hence alternative tools like civic journalism, peace journalism,
alternative news media and educational media are continuously giving hope for the field.
Common Ground Productions which is the media division of the organisation
called Search for Common Ground (SCG) creates innovative television, radio and Internet
programs for the reduction and prevention of conflict. For example, SCG in Macedonia has
worked with Sesame Workshop and produced a television programme for children called
Nashe Maalo (Our Neighbourhood). The educational goals of the programme were to

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

50

teach children intercultural understanding, cultural awareness and conflict resolution skills
(European Centre for Conflict Prevention, 2003).

The multi track system is widely used in conflict resolution research. There are
organisations that use categorisations that include women, arts, sports, churches and
reconciliation as separate tracks. Malvern Lumsden asserts that arts always has a social
function in expressing the fears and hopes of the society, therefore artists should be
encouraged for creating a culture of peace. For peace processes, arts have been used in the
form of “art therapy, music therapy, dance therapy, drama therapy, poetry therapy, and
psychodrama/sociodrama” (1999: 145). As an example of art’s contribution to
reconciliation processes, poetry as the most celebrated and respected art in Somaliland has
been used for the cause of peacemaking. In ceremonies, distinguished national poets recite
their poems that advocate peace. As Farah states poetry has the power to influence
people’s opinion, like the mass media has in the West (2001).
2.10. Two Concrete Examples of Track Two Diplomacy Efforts
2.10.1. Protracted Burundian conflict
Jan Van Eck, a white South African and a member of Parliament for the African
National Congress (ANC) decided to retire from the Parliament to dedicate himself to the
protracted Burundian conflict, in early 1996. He did not represent the interests of his
government. The two NGOs the Center for Conflict Resolution of Cape Town and Search
For Common Ground (SCG) supported the project by giving Van Eck the right to operate
without any dictation. In the beginning Burundians had suspicion of foreigners who came
“to help” them to resolve the conflict. In the first phase of intensive analysis taking more
than twelve months he found out Burundians hesitated to move forward due to two
reasons. First there was a complete breakdown in trust between opposing ethnic forces

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

51

stemming from past violent acts, broken promises and bad faith. Second there have been
disastrous failures in previous attempts. Burundians have dehumanised one another to such
a degree, it was so unrealistic to hope for their willingness to negotiate in good faith. When
Van Eck introduced the negotiation principles, he received a hostile response. Moving
further, the opposing parties chose to use the phrase “talks” instead of “negotiations”. The
dialogue and discussions took place in private and in small groups in private settings.
Having started trust building and re-humanisation steps the parties declared to “try”
negotiations again. Once Burundians had overcome their initial fears and concerns and had
developed a faith in the possibility of trust building and negotiation, it became their
process. Key role players of opposing sides created an interim grand coalition government
in order to ensure the cooperation of those with power and those who lost power. Because
of this partnership, the government decided to return to the external negotiations under
mediation of former Tanzanian president. Both internal and external peace processes
continue today (Van Eck, 2001).
Van Eck notes that his “organic” approach to peacemaking created tension with
him and first track diplomats. The approach of the latter party was to rush in a hurry to
make the parties sign the agreement, since they already prepared the “solution” to the
conflict and they knew the guilty ones. Van Eck’s knowledge on the real dynamics of the
ground was far better and he tended to be less tolerant to regional and international track
one role-players who might be applying the wrong solutions (2001).
2.10.2. Northern Ireland Conflict
Throughout the conflict, there have been a variety of track two initiatives that
assisted the first track. Many of them focused on trying contact between politicians,
between governments and the paramilitaries and between civic society and the
governments. Indigenous mediators, as well as some outside actors conducted most of

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

52

these initiatives. In the early 1990s, the number of community initiatives increased
significantly. These organisations were providing training on dialogue bringing people
from all sections touching upon a variety of issues. In the beginning the academic
community stayed distant to the constructive dialogue building processes. Then, academics
of the University of Ulster took the initiative to facilitate developing a Northern Ireland
Center in Brussels under the auspices of both parties and the business community. During
the 1990s, academics took the initiative to organise workshops to make politicians meet to
address issues of conflict resolution. A program called Initiative 92 asked local
communities to express their opinions about ways for the future of Northern Ireland.
Although condemned by most politicians, the initiative was successful in receiving over
500 submissions, holding public workshops, expanding ideas and eventually in developing
the Opsahl Report, huge ideas book that has been very fruitful to generate the Belfast
Agreement. In addition, churches—although they contributed little to dialogue processes—
and the business community have been active in conflict resolution processes as well. In
mid-1990s, there have been confidential workshops held between members of
Protestant/Unionist clergy and Sinn Fein for several years. These workshops provided a
useful context where Sinn Fein could address the real perceptions and fears of the Unionist
community. The business community was a late comer but was effective in the peace
process. Business leaders cooperated with each other and with trade unions in order to find
ways to put pressure on paramilitaries to end the violence. They also encouraged all parties
to the conflict to engage in political negotiations (Fitzduff, 2001).
According to Mari Fitzduff, without track two efforts, the blockage of dialogue
between the government and paramilitaries would not have been broken. The creativity
and courage of unofficial actors from the academia, business sector and the community
developed exits for parties to meet each other away from the spotlight. Thus both track one

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

53

and track two actors have been very reluctant to accept the contribution of the other party
in the peace process (2001).
2.11. The Problems and Needs of the Field of Track Two Diplomacy
It is not an easy task to demonstrate the success of efforts to prevent conflict, since
each case is unique for itself. It is also a difficult task to quantify the change in attitudes
and relations, thus donors demand systematic assessment and they are hesitant to support
activities to promote peace.
Brand-Jacobsen makes an emphasis on one the problem areas of non-state peace
efforts. According to him, those coming from the outside sometimes strengthen the
systems that lay at the root causes of violence. This fact might be linked with state and
outside funding, aiming to halt direct violence with an unwillingness to challenge deeper
dynamics of war and violence, sometimes depending upon strategic interests of the donors
(2004). Non-state actors aiming to mitigate violence could risk their trustworthiness by not
focusing on the underlying structural and cultural factors of violence or by not taking
account of the role their own countries played in wars.
Albert Schnabel in his analysis on non-state actors’ contribution to peace processes
argues NGOs focus on seeking quick results under pressure like governments do. While
politicians have few years before next elections, many NGOs depend upon funds provided
for periods often less than one year. In order to secure continuation of funding, NGOs need
to show funders success stories. In addition, in some cases the success of some NGOs can
be attained only when some governments and international organisations create the
economic and social environment that allows NGOs to pursue their work. Schnabel also
draws attention to those “irresponsible attention-getters” who search for success stories to
impress the news media and donors, as well as those who pursue constant competition with
other NGOs to become visible (2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

54

Antonia Handler Chayes and Abram Chayes point out the failure of international
community to integrate its efforts into a consistent policy in the intervention into post-Cold
War conflicts. Since resources are scarce to deal with conflicts and as conflicts of the new
era are too complex and fast moving, it is suggested to set radical decentralisation with
clear direction for cooperation. INGOs and inter-governmental organisations have recently
begun to dedicate energy to formulate detailed strategy to execute broad goals. Most of
them have recently acknowledged the necessity to ask for help where the capacity is
already built. The lack of long-term planning is also linked with inadequate financial
resources (1998).
Diamond and McDonald draw the attention to the difficulty to determine the
effectiveness of peacemaking efforts as well. They argue the system of multi track
diplomacy operates in the dark with the hope that integrated efforts will have lasting
effects. A related problem area is funding agencies’ insistence on gaining measurable
results in a specific time frame with a durable outcome. As stressed earlier, most of the
time it is impossible to prove concrete results of conflict resolution work (1996).
In general, for the improvement of the field, scholar-practitioners of the field call
for:
…adequate preparation and training but also transparency, integrity, self-awareness, longterm commitment (to goals, projects, partners), respect for other cultures, openness to
partnership with other professionals, continuous learning and personal transformation,
supporting and empowering others, adaptability in integrating knowledge from different
cultures and continuous evaluation of one’s work (Davies and Kaufman, 2002: 10).

The problem-solving approach as one of the tools for unofficial diplomacy is at an
early phase of development and it needs extensive evaluation, well-trained scholarpractitioners, professionalism, well-defined principles and standards of practice.
The field needs the embodiment of ethnic, gender and age diversity. There is a
serious gap between male dominated conflict resolution circles and women’s peace
initiatives. Western oriented third party interveners must secure the involvement of local
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

55

peace-builders in their facilitation and training programs. Young people who are regarded
as passive citizens in social issues should be included in each step of problem-solving and
at all levels of conflict resolution efforts.
Multiple efforts must be well coordinated so that they do not undermine or
duplicate each other. On a broader level, official and unofficial diplomats need to
cooperate by acknowledging each other’s legitimate roles. After all, result oriented and
successful peacemaking is the outcome of a number of coordinated activities undertaken
by governmental and non-governmental actors that work at all levels of society. As
Kriesberg notes, multiple intermediary efforts can impede de-escalation when too many
uncoordinated efforts disseminate various messages to opposing parties regarding the
future of the conflict. He proposes that in large-scale conflicts intermediaries have to act in
coordination in order to be effective (1997). For example, African governments make the
complaint that NGOs working in close geographical proximity undertake activities that are
in conflict with each other. This situation causes severe problems in local communities
(Natsios, 1997). Schnabel claims that the lack of coordination between NGOs makes
governments and international organisations hard to deal with them who prefer to ally with
organisations that possess transparent and hierarchical structures (2004).
Jos Havermans draws the attention to amateurs in the field that might cause damage
by not acknowledging their limitations. It is inevitable that some people serving as civil
diplomats may lack knowledge and background of a conflict; hence realising flaws and
shortages is necessary to prevent possible negative effects on the process. Experience has
proven that private peacemakers need to be fully informed on the history of the conflict
and the entailing issues. They should also be aware of the potential risk or threats to those
invited to participate. Another problem area according to Havermans is second track
diplomats’ vulnerability to manipulations. Some parties to a conflict may seem to be

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

56

willing to compromise and open contacts with unofficial mediators in order to gain time to
increase their military position (1999).
The fact that there are many different persons or groups to engage in mediation
activities may mean that they interfere with each other instead of complementing each
other. In addition, there is always the possibility of applying an inappropriate strategy or
application of a strategy by an inappropriate person or group (Kriesberg, 1996).

3. Background Information on Chosen Conflicts
“There is, at present, more literature on the destructive effects of war and other extreme
trauma than on the positive means of reconstructing a peaceful society” (Lumsden, 1999:
137).

3.1. Conflict between Turkey and Greece
The conflict between Greece and Turkey dates back to the emergence of modern
Greece in 1830 following the Greek war for independence between 1821-1829, and the
formation of modern Turkey in 1923 after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire. Since 1930,
when Greek Prime Minister Venizelos signed a “Friendship, Neutrality, Reconciliation and
Arbitration Pact” with Turkey (Aydıntaşbaş, 2004), the two countries negotiated and
signed many treaties and agreements as well as came to brink of war in 1974 over the
Cyprus issue. Except the 1974 case, Turkey and Greece were able to avoid war with the
crucial advantage of two countries’ NATO membership that helps to enforce stability and
allows preserving peace. However the long-lengthiness of Turkish-Greek relations has not
been able to foster a long-lasting settlement between these two neighbour countries
(Volkan, 1997). Yet a series of expected and unexpected incidents that emerged in 1999
have contributed to acceleration in betterment of relations between the two neighbour
countries at the political as well as societal level.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

57

Volkan argues, in order to reach the goal of an independent nation-state, the Greeks
had to accomplish three tasks: fighting against the declining Ottoman empire for their
independence; reclaiming members of their ethnic group in former and remaining soil of
the empire; and creating a culturally homogenous society. For the maintenance of
Hellenism, a shared psychological mechanism was needed, that was the total
externalisation of unwanted aspects of togetherness of Greeks and Turks that signifies the
period of 1453-1830. “Greeks had to rid themselves of the Turk within that had been
formed during the time of togetherness” (Volkan, 1997: 123).
Apart from the conflict over Cyprus, the issue that divide Greece and Turkey
involve the delimitation of the continental shelf in the Aegean Sea, issues of air space and
territorial waters, the disputed interpretation of treaty restrictions on the militarisation of
certain Greek islands, and the condition of the Greek minority mainly in Istanbul and
Turkish minority mainly in western Thrace.
Both nations have existed in frequent conflict with each other that has been used
“as a way to strengthen their respective national identities by constantly carving a
convenient image of ‘other’ as a way to bolster hatred, distrust, and antagonism against one
another” (Kirişçi and Çarkoğlu, 2004: 36). The distrust was aggravated with Greece’s
pursuit of union with Cyprus, Turkey’s ambitions for the division of the island and
indecent riots against the Greek community in Istanbul in 1955.
In 1976 and 1987, there have been crises over the Aegean continental shelf.
Following the crises, government leaders of both countries took steps to engage in dialogue
that resulted with signing memoranda of understanding on disputes (Rumelili, 2004b).
These two crises led to discussions and agreements on the issues of flight control and
delimitation of the continental shelf, cooperation in trade, tourism and communications,
respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty (Rumelili, 2004a).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

58

In 1992, high-level meetings were held on various occasions between prime
ministers of both countries. Within this framework, an “Agreement of Friendship, Good
Neighborliness and Cooperation” was decided for signature between Turkey and Greece.
Though, the Cyprus issue appeared as a barrier to the signing of this agreement (Turkish
Embassy, 2005).
In 1996, the relation between Turkey and Greece became threatened by the dispute
over the islets of Kardak/Imia, a conflict instigated by both countries’ media and soon
backed by both governments. These islets are one of those isles, islets and rocks—
unknown to many people—located in the Aegean Sea that cannot preserve human
habitation and whose status is not delimited by the territorial waters of neither Turkey nor
Greece. The role played by the US government contributed to the prevention of a
militarised confrontation between two countries. In 1997 through the Madrid Declaration
both states agreed not to use violence and act unilaterally (Rumelili, 2004a).
The relations became highly strained in February 1999, when PKK leader Abdullah
Öcalan was captured in Kenya carrying a Cypriot passport sheltered by the Greek
Embassy. The devastating Marmara earthquake and the following Athens earthquake of
1999 were certain factors to mitigate the conflict and to serve for the reconciliation
between the two nations. The ice-melting effects of the misfortunate earthquake disasters
and following diplomatic steps have been called by some scholars as ‘seismic’ or
‘earthquake diplomacy’. The favourable climate has encouraged the leadership of both
countries particularly foreign ministers İsmail Cem and George Papandreou to establish
friendly relations. In fact the two foreign ministers had already taken steps to cooperate on
various issues 8 prior to earthquakes. With this attempt for rapprochement Papandreou and

8

The two foreign ministers who met in New York on 30 June 1999 decided to cooperate in tourism,
environment, culture and trade and to fight against organized crime, drug trafficking, illegal migration and
terrorism. They have used earthquakes as an indispensable opportunity to break mutual distrust and foster

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

59

Cem have in a way risked their future political life. Following talks, a Greek-Turkish
Steering Committee was established that convenes once in a year, as do six working
groups comprising delegates from the relevant ministries, headed by foreign ministry
officials (Greece MFA, 2005).
At this time frame, US was in full support for the improvement of Greek-Turksish
bilateral relations due to NATO interventions, as summarised by US President Bill
Clinton:
In order for our two NATO allies, Greece and Turkey, to be full partners in the European
Union, bilateral relationships must improve. In order for southeastern Europe to overcome
the Balkan wars in Bosnia and Kosovo, and the legacy of communism in the other states of
the southeast, the nations of the region must draw closer to each other, and then together
draw closer to the new Europe (The White House, 1999).

When Helsinki European Council has designated Turkey as a candidate country in
December 1999, rapprochement between two countries turned indispensable. According to
Helsinki Council decision, Turkey has pledged to resolve its outstanding disputes over
borders and to bring these issues to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in case of
failure in dispute resolution (Rumelili, 2004b).
The year 1999 significant with its ups and downs in Turkish-Greek relations and
subsequent years have seen many other developments. With confidence building measures
(CBM) within the framework of NATO, two countries have pledged to reduce military
exercises as well as to exchange information on the matter. Papandreou’s official visit to
Turkey in year 2000 has been the first in the last 38 years. Since then, exchange of official
visits has become a ritual (Rumelili, 2004b).
In October 2000, the dogfight incidents between Turkish and Greek fighter jets
resulted with Greece’s withdrawal from NATO’s Destined Glory exercises. Also in May
and June 2003, the tension between two countries heightened when Turkish fighter jets

conditions of openness (Akıncı, 2002). Though, many of these agreements need to be put into
implementation (Rumelili, 2004b).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

60

were alleged to have harassed Greek jets and a passenger plane (Rumelili, 2004b). But
none of these issues have carried bilateral relations to the degree of Kardak/Imia islets
crisis, since probably media in both countries has transformed its attitude after 1999.
In 2003, the two foreign ministers reviewed the progress made in cooperation
between the two countries and the implementation of bilateral agreements. Towards the
end of 2003, bilateral ‘Agreement On The Avoidance Of Double Taxation’ was signed by
concerning ministries (Greece MFA, 2005). Since 2002, over thirty secret negotiations
have been undertaken between the two foreign ministries (Rumelili, 2004b). In mid-2004
prime ministers of both countries held official talks by confirming bilateral relations will
not be affected by the Cyprus issue. Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdoğan made the
promise that the Halki Seminary in Istanbul will soon reopen. Both prime ministers also
confirmed that talks aimed at delineating Aegean continental shelf would continue and the
issue would be taken to ICJ only if both countries have already come to an agreement
(EUBorderConf, 2004).
Having a general look at relations between Turkey and Greece, Cyprus issue had
been a major source of conflict between the two countries. Though today, Greek-Turkish
relations are considered as being at a turning point particularly due to Turkey’s EU
accession process, as asserted by many scholars. Both parties have succeeded to a large
extent to focus on reconciliation by secluding the Cyprus problem. Nevertheless, resolving
the Cyprus conflict would invigorate the dialogue that has already started (Kirişçi and
Çarkoğlu, 2004).
The role of EU has been more general for Turkish-Greek relations while the US has
focused more on crisis prevention and de-escalation. The EU demands from candidate
countries to resolve bilateral disputes with members and other candidate countries as well
as to improve their confidence in international relations. Greece’s decision to join the

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

61

European Monetary Union has necessitated decreasing its defence expenditures that
encouraged Greek leadership to improve relations with Turkey. Another development has
been recorded when G. Papandreou asserted that Turkish minority in western Thrace had
been wrongly treated (Kirişçi and Çarkoğlu, 2004).
As a last remark on Greek-Turkish relations, the bright light of reconciliation
between the two countries highly encouraged and accelerated by Turkey’s EU accession
process should not be too dazzling since state of relations between Turkey and Greece and
emotional state of both societies towards each other are still too fragile. Also, the
unpredictability of the media’s reaction in crisis situations in both countries’ is a factor
worth to be taken into consideration in the long-term process of rapprochement. The
inclination of political leaders to use Turkish-Greek relations from time to time in internal
affairs can also be a threatening factor. As expressed by Hercules Millas “due to its fragile
structure, the relations [between Turkey and Greece] can go backwards even in a little
crisis” (2000). After all, making the statement “let us forget the past and head for the
future” does not secure a stable peace since both societies have to reconcile their past.
3.2. Cyprus Conflict
Conflict resolution scholar-practitioners define Cyprus conflict as an intractable,
identity-based (Fisher, 2001) and protracted ethno-nationalist conflict (Anastasiou, 2002;
Broome, 2004) that has been keeping the international community busy for over forty
years. A considerable amount of time, energy and financial resources have been allocated
by formal mediation mainly by the UN as well as unofficial third party organizations for
producing a settlement and establishing the conditions for a durable peace in this eastern
Mediterranean island.
In 1960, Cyprus gained its independence after the island passed its sovereignty
from Turkey to UK following the Lausanne Treaty of 1923. Prior, the Greek Cypriot (GC)

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

62

community started to establish intentions to unite with Greece (enosis) that transformed
into guerrilla warfare with the formation of the National Organization of Cypriot Fighters
(EOKA). Following loss of lives of many, the Turkish Cypriots (TC) felt alienated and
they responded to enosis with the ambition for partition into two separate communities
(taksim). The TCs formed the Turkish Defence Organization (TMT) that had limited intercommunal fighting until there was a ceasefire in 1958 (Fisher, 2001).
Prior to independence the TCs lived widely dispersed in the island, both in separate
and mixed villages. As stressed by Fisher, social relations between two communities were
usually harmonious, though when it came to intermarriage the religious borders were
drawn. During the 1963-1974 period the dispersion of TCs transformed into formation of
enclaves. Between 1963-1970 about 25.000 TCs and 500 GCs became uprooted and
displaced (2001). The TC enclaves represented three per cent of the island’s territory
(Akgün, et al., 2005).
The constitution of 1960 gave TCs a representation level at 30% to 40% in the
chambers, cabinet, public services, police and the army. The first president was a GC
(Archbishop Makarios), while the vice president was a TC (Fazıl Küçük) as the leader of
TC community. Later GCs proposed amendments to the constitution what would reduce
the representation and autonomy of TCs. TCs’ and Turkey’s rejection of the amendments
caused the eruption of inter-communal violence. The intensification of violence caused the
involvement of UN that established the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) in
March 1964 (Fisher, 2001). Initially planned for three months, UNFICYP still remains on
the island as UN’s longest peacekeeping mission (Asmussen, 2004).
In 1974 the situation worsened caused by the Athens triggered coup against
Makarios. The fighting between left-wing supporters of Makarios and coupists followed
attacks on TC villages and enclaves (Fisher, 2001). This situation caused Turkey to

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

63

intervene militarily by emphasizing its right according to 1960 Treaty of Guarantee.
Turkey sent troops to the island proceeding the partition in Cyprus (Asmussen, 2004). The
ceasefire initiated by the UN created the still remaining ‘Green Line’ across the entire
island going through the capital city Nicosia dividing the north and south of the island.
Following the ceasefire 162.000 GCs moved from the north to the south and 43.000 TCs
living in south moved to north (Akgün, et al., 2005), creating an immense refuge problem.
The transfer of both populations resulted with the change of demographic map of the island
into two separated communities.
In 1975 the TC community declared itself as the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus,
Rauf Denktaş becoming its leader. On the other hand, the GC community received
international recognition as Republic of Cyprus. GCs were able to secure an economic
embargo, and political and cultural restrictions on TCs. In 1983 the TC administration
declared independence as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), recognized
only by Turkey (Fisher, 2001). According to Ahmet Sözen, GC leader Spiros Kyprianou’s
resistance to talk to Denktaş in negotiations perceiving it as accepting him as an equal,
gave TCs the necessary pretext to declare TRNC (2004). The declaration was soon
condemned by the UNSC. The non-recognition by the international community was caused
by the objection to expulsion of thousands of GCs. As a result, north Cyprus has been
subject to international embargoes 9 (Asmussen, 2004).
In 1990, the GC administration made an application to join the EU, causing further
alienation of TCs. When EU accession talks began with the Republic of Cyprus
government, TRNC entered into an association agreement for greater economic and
military integration with Turkey. Following incidents have led Turkey to station
approximately 30.000 troops in the north patrolled by the UNFICYP (Fisher, 2001). In
9

Greek Cypriots’ per capita income is more than three times that of Turkish Cypriots partly due to the
difficulties caused by the unrecognized status of TRNC (Broome, 2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

64

1994, European Court of Justice ruled that direct trade between north Cyprus and EU was
illegal (BBC News, 2004). In August 1996, the tension heightened due to violent events in
the buffer zone. GC bikers broke through the barricades of UN peacekeeping soldiers and
invaded the buffer zone to get into the north. During this and following events two GCs
were killed which soon caused a communal protest and demonstrations in the south
(Wolleh, 2001). In December 1997, TC administration blocked issuing permissions at the
Ledra Palace checkpoint due to Luxembourg European Council’s decision to leave Turkey
out of EU candidates list and to include Republic of Cyprus in the enlargement process.
The freeze of contacts was lifted after Helsinki European Council’s decision to designate
Turkey as a candidate country in December 1999 (Cockburn, 2004).
On 21 April 2003, the restrictions on the freedom of movement were partially
raised, that allowed ordinary citizens to cross the buffer zone for visits, meetings and faceto-face communication 10 (Broome, 2004). This unexpected step taken by TC authorities
was interpreted by some circles as highly linked with Republic of Cyprus’s accession to
the EU, since only one week ago Cyprus signed the accession agreement with the EU in
Athens. The fact that since 1964 two communities have barely had direct and interpersonal contact and interaction, the ease of freedom of movement in 2003 created a vast
opportunity for inter-communal communication that is free from the negative influence of
the mass media and politics.
The history of mediation and negotiation efforts shapes another path that went
throughout the history of the conflict. Cyprus conflict is the “oldest item continuously on
the [UN] Secretary General's peacemaking agenda” (UNSC, 2003) and UN’s most
extensive failure in international diplomacy. The Eden Plan against the guerrilla campaign
of EOKA, the Harding Plan offering majority self-government with minority rights for
10

Within three days around 17.000 people crossed the green line (BBC News, 2004) and in the first three
weeks 350.000 crossings were recorded (Cockburn, 2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

65

TCs, the British Macmillan Plan for a bi-communal constitution and separate
municipalities, the Zurich-London accords imposing a power-sharing constitution and
excluding enosis and taksim appear as proofs of inability of power mediation during the
1955-1960 period (Fisher, 2001).
The 1964-1974 period representing inter-communal violence, attempts of mediation
generally failed. According to Sözen, US and UK perceived the Cyprus question as a
serious issue that must be taken under control before it undermines relations between
Turkey and Greece as two NATO allies. The US sponsored mediation attempt in 1963 and
the UK sponsored London Conference both failed (2004). The stationing of UN
peacekeeping forces was followed by the Acheson Plan initiated by the US, which was
also rejected. The heightening of violence in 1967 and worsening of relations between
Turkey and Greece led to the mediation of US envoy Cyrus Vance. As a result around
12.000 troops were removed and economic blockade of TC enclaves was terminated.
Throughout 1968-1974 period there have been several inter-communal talks
organized by the UN. Local political resistance, outside interference (Fisher, 2001), lack of
willingness to cooperate with each other, TCs’ position to maintain regional autonomy in
their enclaves and GCs position to maintain total control of the government (Sözen, 2004)
were major aspects of this period.
In the post-1974 period the federal model instead of a unitary-state or powersharing arrangement became more applicable. The conferences in Geneva in 1974 attended
by guarantor powers 11 and following Vienna talks held in 1975-76 are major steps taken to
bring peace to Cyprus. In 1977 the TC leader Denktaş and GC leader Makarios started
meeting under UN auspices resulting with the document called Four Guidelines. The first
item suggested an independent, non-aligned, bi-communal federal republic. Other points

11

UK, Turkey and Greece.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

66

were on territorial issues; freedoms of movement, settlement and ownership; and a central
federal government.
The following initiative coming from US envoy Clark Clifford drove to
negotiations on federal arrangements. The issue of division of powers resulted with
negotiations’ failure. Another attempt, called the ABC plan proposed by US and supported
by UK and Canada was concerning a set of principles on the constitution and adjustments
of the territories. Both parties rejected the plan since the negotiation setting transformed
into power mediation (Fisher, 2001).
In 1979 the attempt of UN for talks between two leaders, Denktaş and Kyprianou
was able to engender the ‘Ten Point Agreement’ that laid the foundation for resuming
inter-communal talks. In spite of the positive atmosphere that emerged with the agreement,
the restart of negotiations with the support of UN representative Javier Perez De Cuellar
did not run positively since parties disagreed on the priority and order of agreement items.
In 1980, the talks resumed with the assistance of UN representative Hugo Gobbi; and in
1982 UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim presented an evaluation paper called the
Interim Agreement shaping the points of coincidence and divergence of both parties’
positions. De Cuellar becoming the UN Secretary General proposed zones of compromise
on major issues. This period coincided with declaration of independence of TRNC that
furthered the intractability of the conflict. Following a set of proximity talks between two
parties, De Cuellar produced the ‘Draft Framework Agreement’ and organized a high-level
meeting in New York, in 1985. Denktaş accepted the document, while Kyprianou would
endorse it as a basis for further negotiations. A different version of document presented to
parties led this time to GCs’ acceptance and TCs’ refusal. Later on, a further draft
agreement presented in 1986 was accepted by TCs and Turkey and rejected by GCs.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

67

Negotiations did not start until 1988. Both sides developed papers on subject
matters of most concern to them that helped UN mediators Oscar Camilion and Gustave
Feissel to produce a draft agreement. In 1990, a high-level meeting in New York led to an
impasse where the UN Secretary General was expecting an agreement. In 1992, the ‘Set of
Ideas’ further developed by the UN was forwarded to parties by the new UN Secretary
General Boutros Boutros-Ghali. Towards the end of 1992, the GCs accepted the document
as the basis for an overall framework agreement, while TCs rejected approximately 10% of
it demanding two sovereign states in the federation instead of one single sovereignty in the
federation. Other issues of concern were the return of GC population and the territorial
adjustments.
During 1993-1995 the UN initiated ‘Confidence Building Measures’ (CBM) to
focus on substantive matters. The fifteen CBMs were focusing on issues of water problem,
education, joint cultural and sports events, journalists, chambers of commerce and
industry, international assistance, health and environment, electricity, fenced area of
Varosia/Maraş, mixed village of Pyla, buffer zone in Nicosia, Nicosia Airport, extending
the unmanning agreement and periodical meetings for further measures. The result of the
measures was negative.
The impasse was not broken until mid-1997, with a series of negotiations between
both leaders Denktaş and Glafcos Clerides initiated by the new UN Secretary General Kofi
Annan and strong US and UK support. The talks were stalemated due to TCs protest
against EU’s decision to begin accession talks with the Republic of Cyprus. In late 1999,
proximity talks resumed with the guidance of Annan and his special adviser for Cyprus
Alvaro De Soto.
In 2002, the EU enlargement calendar urged UN to generate a comprehensive
solution. It became clear that prior to Republic of Cyprus’s official membership of EU on 1

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

68

May 2004, a negotiated solution proved essential. The proposed solution known as the
Annan Plan 12 has been the most detailed and extensive solution plan ever produced on the
Cyprus issue. The plan included all principles and agreements met by the two parties,
filling in all the gaps. (Sözen, 204). The plan was presented to both parties and the
guarantor powers and was revised five times before it came to public vote on 24 April
2004. The plan was proposing a United Cyprus Republic that would join the EU as a
federal state. The referenda resulted with GCs’ rejection of the plan with 75, 8% in contrast
with TCs’ approval with 64,9%, signifying the failure of the Annan Plan (Asmussen,
2004). On 1 May 2004 Cyprus took its place as one of the new ten member states to join
the EU, but as a divided island.
Fair division of resources and land, the rights of investment in property, land and
enterprise, the return of displaced populations or their compensation, the structure of the
administration and the distribution of powers in a confederal or federal state remain the
items on the negotiation agenda (Cockburn, 2004). In having a general look at the conflict
it becomes clear that:
…deep rooted intercommunal mistrust has contributed significantly to failure and
impasse,… the shifting balance of power has been exploited at different times by each side,
only to see their more strident approach countered by greater resistance from the other,…
when one side accepted the UN proposals, the other side would balk… [w]hen modifications
were made to redress the concerns, the first party would now remove its acceptance, even
though the substance had changed little. Such failures and frustrations in negotiations then
become additional issues in the conflict, enabling the parties yet again to blame the other
side, adding to escalation and intractability,… neither community in Cyprus has wanted a
compromise settlement, but has viewed mediation as a way of pursuing their initial (and
incompatible) objectives (Fisher, 2001: 322).

The inapplicability and inappropriateness of traditional mediation in escalating
identity-based conflicts is emphasised by scholar-practitioners of peace and conflict
resolution as is relevant for Cyprus conflict.

12

Original title of the plan is ‘Basis for Agreement on a Comprehensive Settlement of the Cyprus Problem’

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

69

3.3. Conflict between Turkey and Armenia
“The lack of independent and sovereign experience to conduct foreign policy” for
South Caucasus countries “has made the foreign policy formulation process a task reliant
on factors such as historical experience, perceptions of other actors’ intentions, domestic
constraints and to some extent geopolitical realities” as in the case of Armenia’ relations
with its western neighbour Turkey. When Armenia declared its independence in 1991,
Armenian leadership was eager to establish diplomatic relations with Turkey “to
counterbalance the Russian influence as well as to obtain an outlet towards the West for
the infant republic” (Kotchikian, 2005: 3).
The dispute between Armenia and Turkey as two sovereign states dates back to
year 1993 when Turkey closed its border with Armenia for traffic due to ArmenianAzerbaijani territorial dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh. The source of conflict between the
two countries is not limited to the issues of Nagorno-Karabakh and the current state of the
closed border. Particularly, the events of 1915 being refused by Turkey to be recognised as
genocide renders the relations between the two countries come to a stalemate. In addition,
Turkey’s solidarity with Azerbaijan and the pressure and rigid stance of the Armenian
Diaspora and its influence on Armenia’s foreign policy, and hardliners on both sides
expose other factors to play crucial roles in the relation between the two countries.
Turkey was one of the first countries to recognize Armenian independence in 1991
signalling that it was open to cooperate with the new republic. In 1992 Turkish government
forwarded a set of preconditions for normalisation of relations with Armenia. These were;
first Armenia’s relinquishment of territorial claims from Turkey, second Armenia’s
abandonment of campaign to force Turkey to acknowledge the genocide, and third
withdrawal of Armenian troops from occupied territory of Azerbaijan—Nagorno-Karabakh
(Kotchikian, 2005).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

70

The first Armenian president Levon Ter-Petrossian supported the idea that Armenia
needed to have good relations with Turkey, since the landlocked country needed an exit
through Turkey; and it was in the interest of Armenia economically as well as politically to
have good relations with its western neighbour. Soon this policy was refuted by nationalistwing Armenians with the pretext of Turkey’s status of still being a genocidal power. The
then Turkish President Turgut Özal asserted that if there were no achievement on the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, there would be a blockade. The following incident was
Turkey’s announcement for the cease of delivery of wheat—as food aid to Armenia—
through Turkey unless Armenian government agreed to Turkish government’s demands. In
1993, the border between the two countries became closed, which remains closed until
today (Kotchikian, 2005)
As an influential party to the conflict, the Armenian Diaspora opposes the opening
of the border besides nationalists in Armenia and Turkey as well as Azerbaijan.
Dashnaksutyun Party (Armenian Revolutionary Federation, ARF) as one of the members
in the Armenian coalition government has maintained a campaign to keep the border
closed by claiming that cross-border trade would undermine Armenian manufacturers and
business people who will have to compete with inexpensive Turkish products. Their
second argument is that normalisation of bilateral relations between the two countries
would make Turkey’s recognition of genocide impossible (Danielyan, 2005).
Dashnaksutyun’s concerns on the open border are not shared by the President Robert
Kocharian and the two other parties in the coalition government (Markarian, 2004).
Armenian Diaspora perceives any agreement between Turkey and Armenia with
doubts since it demands Turkey’s recognition of the events of 1915 as genocide to start
bilateral relations. Asbed Kotchikian describes the main dilemma that Armenia’s foreign
policy faces is “how to balance Realpolitik with the wishes and demands of the Diaspora

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

71

and those of the nationalists in Armenia, which contributes in no small degree to the
various economic and social development plans and projects in the republic” (2005: 6-7).
He claims that opening of the border could diminish Armenia’s dependence on Russia and
Georgia 13 , as well as weaken the view that Armenia “should rely on Russia to ‘protect’ it
from Turkey” (2005: 11).
Relations between Turkey and Azerbaijan in general have been on the scale of
trying to ease tension between Armenia and Azerbaijan on the part of Turkey and
Azerbaijan’s unwavering opposition to the idea of opening border between Turkey and
Armenia. In 1997, Turkish government gave the signal that it wanted to open the border
with the aim first to ease the tension over the Nagorno-Karabakh issue and second to
increase direct trade between Turkey and Armenia (Özalp, 1997). This was strongly
opposed by Azerbaijan, as it would do in Turkey’s future statements to normalise relations
with Armenia. In Azerbaijan, the possibility of a Turkish-Armenian rapprochement raises
concerns since the country is worried about weakening its position in the search for a
political settlement of the dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh (Peuch, 2003).
In contrast to Azerbaijani position, the business people in Turkey besides local
authorities of cities bordered with Armenia have sought and lobbied for the opening of the
border and the consequent lifting of the blockade. According to the argument of business
circles, the existing export infrastructures—roads and railways—of Turkey are going
through Armenia that connect Turkey with the former Soviet world. A further assertion is
that renovation of Kars- Gyumri [Armenia]- Tbilisi [Georgia] railway would be beneficial
and economically viable (Peuch, 2003).

13

Currently Georgia plays the important role as a transit country between Turkey and Armenia. Over 90% of
Armenia’s external trade is carried out through Georgia. In 2004, Armenian Minister of Transport and
Communications made the statement that they would like to get rid of Georgia’s monopolist status in railway
communication and the disproportionately high transit fees charged by Tbilisi (Markarian, 2004). The
obligatory passage through Georgia means a substantial cost for Turkish merchants as well (Gültekin, 2002).
Goods are also exchanged through Iran.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

72

The US had an active role in the attempt of convincing Turkey to open up the
border with Armenia as well. In 2003, US put a pressure on Turkey to open the border with
reassurance that the issue of genocide recognition would not be going away. US officials
asserted that Turkey’s economy would be stimulated and its position in the region
strengthened. Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gül was reassured by US officials that
Armenians have never had territorial claims. However, due to US administration’s
preoccupation with Iraq, its pressure on Turkish government to open the border weakened
(Phillips, 2005).
There have been several other developments. In January 2002, visa requirements
have been made simpler for Armenian citizens who want to enter Turkey by plane. This
decision was presented by the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs as a sign of good
intention taking into account the humanitarian considerations (Gültekin, 2002). In June
2002, the Armenian Foreign Minister visited Turkey to attend the Black Sea Co-operation
Council 14 in Istanbul. In October 2003, charter flights by a Turkish company started from
Istanbul to Yerevan 15 .
In January 2004, Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan stated that his government might
decide to reopen the border if Turkey’s initiatives are reciprocal. He asserted that those
regions of Turkey bordered with Armenia would like to have the border open in order to
make trade with Armenia (Agayev, 2004).
In February 2004, Turkish Minister of Communications stated that the restart of
railway transportation between Armenia and Turkey would be beneficial for eastern
Anatolian economy. In June 2004, at the NATO Summit in Istanbul, foreign ministers of
Turkey, Armenia and Azerbaijan held a trilateral meeting for the first time.

14

The Council was established in 1993 when Turkey invited Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia as founding
members.
15
Armenian Airlines already makes flights to Turkey.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

73

As for the EU’s stance, its 2004 Regular Report on Turkey’s Progress Towards
Accession states that “there seems to be rising public awareness of the benefits of
reopening the border and preparations for enabling goods” and “the existing dialogue
between Turkish, Azeri and Armenian authorities is a positive step to pave the way to a
solution”. The report expresses that “Turkey should … continue to promote stability and
security in its region” (154-155). It is believed, when formal EU membership talks start in
September 2005, there will be a time point during negotiations that Turkey will shake
hands with the Armenians (TDN, 2004), since the “European strategy 16 for developing an
area of good ‘neighbourliness’ has been based on cross-border cooperation” (Gültekin,
2004).
The important elements that thwart dialogue between Turkey and Armenia are the
deep-rooted prejudice and both sides’ misperception of each other. The perception about
the other side has been passed from generation to the next that rendered the conflict
become intractable and protracted. Through time, this perception became embedded in
social and cultural institutions and practices.
In 2005, a research on ‘Armenian and Turkish Citizens’ Mutual Perceptions and
Dialogue’ has been concluded 17 . Its report reveals that the majority of Armenians perceive
the genocide issue as the main obstacle to normalisation of relations between Turkey,
while Turkish people consider obstacles in diverse issues from history to Armenians’
claims for the genocide, from territorial issues to religious differences, from prejudices to
foreign powers and politics and Armenia’s territorial claims from Azerbaijan. Another

16

In June 2004, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia have been included European Neighbourhood Policy
(ENP). The ENP is “defined as the response to both challenges and opportunities of enlargement aiming at
reframing and strengthening relations with those who find themselves on the external land and sea border of
the Union… [It] recognizes the need to foster cooperation both at the European Union external border and
among partner countries” (Gültekin, 2004).
17
The research was undertaken by the Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation (TESEV) and
Sociological and Marketing Research Center of Armenia (HASA). The fieldwork has been conducted
through interviews with 1.219 people from Turkey and 1.000 from Armenia, all from different regions and
provinces of both countries. The report and the findings of the research can be found at www.tesev.org.tr.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

74

striking element of the research is that the majority of both societies approves the opening
of the border, along the establishment of diplomatic relations and the development of
economic collaboration between the two countries. As a final point, the majority of both
societies consider diplomatic relations to be most emphasized for developing relations
between the two countries to their advantage (Kentel and Poghosyan, 2005).

4. Second Track Diplomacy Efforts
“As a field, conflict management is in the early stages of its development, but we cannot
wait for increased theoretical sophistication before we attempt to contribute to peacebuilding efforts. We must research our approach at the same time as we apply it” (Azar,
2002: 30).
4.1. Women’s Peace Initiative (WINPEACE)
When the Kardak/Imia crisis erupted, Margarita Papandreou 18 from Greece and
Zeynep Oral 19 from Turkey made the initiative to assemble women organisations from
Turkey and Greece in 1997. The common point of Turkish and Greek women
organisations was their opposition to inequality between men and women, where women
are put in a disadvantaged position in the society, excluded in decision making processes,
marginalized and subject to oppression and exploitation (WINPEACE, 2005).
Thereby, the Women’s Peace Initiative (WINPEACE) has been started as a
grassroots women’s peace network in the belief that concepts of peaceful coexistence and
nonviolence in resolving the differences are embedded deeply in women’s
consciousness 20 . The network has set its goals of mitigating the tension between Turkey
and Greece by strengthening communication between the two countries’ women’s

18

President of Center for Research and Action on Peace (KEDE). She is the mother of G. Papandreou.
Journalist. She played an active role in various rapprochement activities with Greece
20
Some of the NGOs that are a part of WINPEACE network: Association of Women of the Mediterranean
Region, Association for Supporting and Training Women Candidates, Canadian Voice of Women for Peace,
International Organization for Family Planning, UNESCO Greek National Commission, Women for
Women’s Human Rights and International Association of Women for Peace.
19

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

75

organisations, by encouraging cooperation and intervening peacefully to influence
governments whenever there are crisis situations between the two countries (WINPEACE,
2005). The network has chosen the working method of formulating and implementing
short and long-term projects. The core group gathers twice a year alternately in Greece and
Turkey for follow-up and to discuss themes that they want to work and increase awareness
on (Oral, 2004a).
One of the most important issues that WINPEACE dedicated itself is the arms
reduction. At its first meeting, the movement has made a call for the reduction of military
budget of both countries by 5 %. It was demanded that the funds generated from the
reduction is channelled into education, health, social security and women’s empowerment
(Oral, 2004b).
In 2001, the peace movement has made a statement hailing ministries of defence of
both countries to open peace education units. Both demands—arms reduction and creation
of peace education units—has been strengthened through the information that the amount
spent for one AWACS plane equals to a total amount of scholarships provided to 50.000
disadvantaged school children for a period of 10 years or the total amount of salaries of
5.000 teachers for a period of 10 years (Hürriyet, 2001).
WINPEACE conducts its work as a communication and operation network in a
highly flexible structure. From the day of its inception, the network has used a variety of
activities to accomplish its aim. One of these actions are youth camps aiming at bringing
Turkish and Greek as well as Cypriot students from both communities at high school and
university levels in order to develop their understanding in reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence of the two peoples, where the focus is educational, cultural, and environmental

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

76

issues (WINPEACE, 2005). One of these youth camps has led to the creation of a youth
forum called Turkish-Greek Student Society (TurGreSoc) 21 .
Other activities include an agro-tourism project targeting grassroots women of both
countries, film festivals, development of peace education curriculum and implementing it
as pilot project in Istanbul and Athens, training of trainers on peace education and
translating peace themed books into Greek and Turkish. For example, the Greek children’s
book Peace of Aristophanes by Sofia Zarambouka was translated into Turkish (Oral,
2004a; WINPEACE, 2005).
The peace network is represented in many international platforms where it obtains
the chance to convey its views and standpoint. Inherited in its structure, these views are
declared not as the views of the Turkish and Greek delegations but as the view of
WINPEACE as a whole network (Oral, 2004a). During the 1999 Helsinki European
Council, Turkish women journalists wrote articles and op-eds in newspapers calling the
Greek government not to oppose Turkey’s candidacy. These articles were published in
Greek newspapers such as Avgi and Elefterotipia with the initiation of Greek women.
Women’s standpoint was that Turkey’s EU membership would highly contribute to a
positive climate for rapprochement between the two countries and a stable peace and
welfare for the whole region, which would ultimately serve for improving the status of
women (Tınç, 1999).
In May 1999, WINPEACE conducted an internal interactive conflict resolution
workshop facilitated by competent experts. The aim was to build capacity in conflict
resolution by gaining practical skills in resolving conflicts between Turkish and Greek
women through dialogue and nonviolent action. These workshops made it possible for the
participants to comprehend that political problems between Greece and Turkey could not
21

It organized a forum entitled “Is Reunification Still Possible? Youth Exploring the Dos and Don’ts for a
Settlement in Cyprus” in September 2004. Turkish and Greek students from both sides of Cyprus, Greece
and Turkey have attended the forum (TurGreSoc, 2005).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

77

be solved directly by them, hence developing and implementing joint work would better
serve for the rapprochement process (Oral, 2004a).
Unlike some of the other unofficial diplomacy efforts, WINPEACE did not suspend
its activities on 1999 Öcalan crisis. The main factor has been the network’s structure to
conduct work on project basis and its responsibility to accomplish these projects while
raising public awareness (Oral, 2004a).
Currently, WINPEACE executes a project, funded by EU’s Turkish-Greek Civic
Dialogue Program 22 , implemented by METU Eymir Cultural Foundation. The project has
three components: first women’s agro-tourism applications in Karaburun-İzmir, second
disarmament and peace education campaigns and third translating and publishing literature
of Turkish and Greek women authors in exchange (Oral, 2004b; STGP, 2005).
Karaburun Agro-tourism project initiated in August 2002 is still under
implementation. Women who volunteered and were selected from three different villages
of Karaburun generate alternative income resources by serving tourists who prefer an
alternative holiday. First, women volunteers of Karaburun received training and second
they visited Petra Women Agro-tourism Cooperative based in Lesbos (Midilli) island in
order to receive the experience of Greek women specialised in agro-tourism. As a
following step, Karaburun women established their own cooperative. Governorship of
İzmir and Karaburun district authority supports the project by solving infrastructural
problems of three villages (Current News, 2004a). This project received 2004 award from
the Federation of Turkish Tourist Guide Associations (TUREB) in the category of ‘local
activity’ (Current News, 2005).

22

Besides WINPEACE’s project, Turkish-Greek Civic Dialogue Program supports a media cooperation
project run by the European Centre for Common Ground (ECCG) and a youth project implemented by
AEGEE. The second and third phases of the program supports projects on media cooperation, community
development, women and gender issues, youth empowerment run by Turkish and Greek NGOs (STGP,
2005).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

78

The peace education component of WINPEACE’s EU funded project aims at
including peace education in the curriculum of elementary and high schools in Turkey and
Greece. The peace education course was implemented in two pilot schools in Istanbul and
two schools in Athens (Current News, 2004b). Primary school children in central Athenian
district of Gazi—85 % Turkish speaking, 15 % Greek speaking—were given the same
course (Kitsantonis, 2003). In this framework, WINPEACE activists wrote a teachers’
manual for peace education 23 .
Participants of WINPEACE contribute to its work not as individuals but as the
NGOs they represent; this is how the initiative works as an efficient model of network. The
fact that some of the members are journalists provides the advantage for the network to
voice their demands and views in the media. At the end of each bi-annual meeting, actions
of the network are shared with the public through press meetings, indirectly conveying upto-date information and their demands to respective foreign ministries. Regarding relations
with governments, on the Turkish side, it is stated that throughout the tenure of İsmail
Cem’s Foreign Ministry, there were close relations. Currently, there is only contact with
the Turkish Minister of Education in the framework of peace education curriculum.
Besides, the network maintains contact with other unofficial diplomacy efforts such as
those working for Turkish-Armenian reconciliation, allowed by its networking structure.
Scholars, historians and organisations working in the field of second track diplomacy are
invited to meetings organised by the network. In addition, the network serves as an
information-bridge by helping those individuals and institutions that want to establish
contact with either Greece or Turkey (Oral, 2004a). Cypriot women peace activists from
both communities join meetings as well. Cypriot youth also joins youth camps organised at
various times.
23

The manual written by Jennifer Mansur Sertel and Güliz Kurt comprises a number of activities on peace,
obstacles to peace, prerequisite skills for peace, ethical issues, role of media and conflict resolution skills to
be conducted by teachers (2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

79

4.2. Hands Across the Divide (HAD)
Hands Across the Divide (HAD) is a non-governmental, non-profit, voluntary
organization, active as an informal group from March 2001. The NGO was formally
constituted in February 2002 and officially registered in London as an unincorporated
association 24 . The objective of the group as stated in its constitution is “the improvement
of contact and co-operation between women in the pursuit of peace, equality and human
rights in Cyprus”. Through its vision statement the women “aspire to live in a united
country and to create a democratic society… irrespective of differences”. Their mission is
“to contribute towards a culture of peace and multiculturalism”. The group emphasises
“the urgency for an agreement on the Cyprus problem and accession to the European
Union” 25 (TFP, 2005).
The women’s group is engaged in networking and communication across the Green
Line in Cyprus. It conducts educational, advocacy and lobbying activities and disseminates
information. Members are principally women resident both north and south of the island,
though the NGO includes women overseas considering the diasporic and mobile nature of
the Cypriot society. What makes HAD different from other unofficial peace initiatives is
that first it is not mediated by a foreign institution, second its members consider it as a
unitary organisation rather than a bi-communal project and third it focuses more on
synchronised political action. English is the working language of the group (Cockburn,
2004).

24

Its official formation outside Cyprus is directly linked with partition of the island.
The constitution states that the NGO shall not affiliate to any political party or governmental institution.
The management committee is authorized to take decisions for the association. The constitution proposes an
annual general meeting by either physical or electronic means. The constitution has been signed by 25
women (TFP, 2005). Some of its founding membes are Katie Economidou (conflict resolution trainer), Maria
Hadjipavlou (professor, University of Cyprus), Neşe Yaşın (poet and university professor), Fatma Azgın
(journalist), Sevgül Uludağ (journalist), Cynthia Cockburn and Olga Demetriou (researcher).
25

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

80

The inauguration of the women’s group intersects with the start of the research
project conducted by Cynthia Cockburn 26 . Her research project 27 implemented between
March 2001 and May 2003 tried in general to “establish a women's standpoint from which
to make a gender analysis of the recent history, present realities and possible futures of the
ethnic relations of the island” (Cockburn, 2003).
The idea of HAD originates from the dreams of Katie Economidou and Sevgül
Uludağ to establish a women’s structure spanning the Green Line. Previous attempts had
failed since those did not have any durable organisational structure. In March 2001, the bicommunal seminar titled ‘Communication in Divided Societies: What Women Can Do’
was held. The seminar organised by the British Council and funded by the UK High
Commission gathered many Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot women known with their
bi-communal work, as well women peace activists from Ireland, Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Palestine and Israel as speakers (Cockburn, 2004). Before the seminar threatening articles
appeared on the Greek Cypriot press accusing Greek Cypriot organizers of being traitors
(Anderson, 2002a).
At the closing of the seminar, the women committed to start a women’s movement
that opened the way for HAD’s formation. Cockburn was able to receive funding for the
two-year research project outlined above as well as for some of the activities undertaken by
HAD (Cockburn, 2004). The first step of the group was creating an e-mail network, which
turned out to be a vital organising medium particularly at times when face-to-face
communication was hardly possible.

26

A professor of sociology. Being one of the founders of HAD, she works with the group as a researcher and
author in the field of gender and peace studies and as an anti-militarist feminist activist instead of being a
mediator. Her role included carrying messages to and from south and north of the island. She preferred to
refrain from decision-making holding an observing mode and monitoring HAD’s progress and achievements
(Cockburn, 2004).
27
The principle funders of the project are Barrow Cadburry Trust, the Ahajma Charitable Trust, the Allan
and Nesta Ferguson Charitable Trust and the Network for Social Network. There are several other funding
agencies that contributed to the project (Cockburn, 2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

81

In the beginning a number of mono-communal meetings were organised in the
north and south, since permissions for crossing at the Ledra Palace checkpoint were
refused to HAD members due to political atmosphere created by the seminar. Then the
group started meeting alternatively in the mixed village of Pyla 28 . For some of the women
this was the first time encountering ‘the other’, therefore they decided to take the steps
slow and to understand each other’s fears, positions and values. Though, in a short time
period, differences in the agenda of northern and southern members started to emerge.
There were many disagreements when the group tried to build a unitary organisation. In
the meantime, Uludağ became the subject of a threatening attack in Kıbrıslı newspaper and
another dissident had been car-bombed 29 . In this climate, northern women became
reluctant to cross into Pyla. At this time, Cockburn acted as a messenger between north and
south bringing back and forth positive messages. Women decided to stop meeting in Pyla
for a while and to raise funds for organising a meeting outside the island and for
constructing a website (Cockburn, 2004).
In December 2001, two halves of HAD decided to respond to the meeting of both
political leaders Denktaş and Clerides for a talk—the leaders’ first encounter in the last
four years. The northern women of HAD joined a demonstration organised by ‘41
Organisations’ close to where the leaders met. At the same time, southern women were
busy lobbying a woman EU minister who visited the south. HAD also wrote a letter to the
leaders transmitted through the good offices of UN (Cockburn, 2004).
The planned HAD meeting took place in February 2002 that made its establishment
possible as an association registered in London. The following step was members’
28

Pyla is located next to the buffer zone in the British sovereign base area. It is an hour-long drive from
Nicosia. The place was also known as a center for smugglers and it had a bad reputation (Wolleh, 2001).
29
On 30 November 2001, an article appeared on Kıbrıslı threatening Turkish Cypriot bi-communalists with
torture and using the phrase “a Greek foetus within our very body”, continuing “[o]n the day they sign a
peace agreement, they will be signing your death warrant”. Three days later the newspaper named the bicommunalists, several of them HAD members (Cockburn, 2004: 186). In December 2002, two northern HAD
members were taken to court with others for only reporting on a sacked teacher (Cockburn, 2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

82

commitment to work out a set of shared values and goals after Marie Mulholland, a
feminist activist spent time with both northern and southern members helping them to
focus on group’s aims, intentions and strategies. HAD members had also a chance to meet
with WINPEACE on a two-day meeting in Vienna. Cockburn states that Turks and Turkish
Cypriots discovered a political gap on the Cyprus issue at this meeting, though this
meeting made HAD members feel that they really were a unitary body voicing their needs
to WINPEACE—as peace-minded allies in Greece and Turkey’s women’s movement
(Cockburn, 2004).
In October 2002, HAD sent a letter to UN Secretary General Annan, after the two
leaders failed to reach a negotiation before the EU deadline. The letter was urging the two
leaders and all relevant parties as well as Annan for an urgent solution in Cyprus (HAD,
2002) 30 . In April 2003, HAD distributed a letter to the EU, UN, and both Cypriot
authorities, urging the EU to have Turkish language as one of the official EU languages in
all matters concerning Cyprus (HAD, 2003). When the final deadline 16 April 2003 for a
settlement was declared by the EU, HAD supported a hunger strike in the north and
women in south Nicosia collected messages for peace. In addition northern women sent
Denktaş some henna, which made southern women puzzled who speculated about the
origin of this mysterious gesture. Not very long after, on 21 April 2003 TRNC announced
to open the barrier at the Ledra Palace checkpoint (Cockburn, 2004). At the end of April
2003, HAD along with other Cypriot NGOs made the demand from international
community and authorities to open new crossing points, to lift the restriction for crossings
between 09.00-24.00, to reunify communication systems, to start teaching of Turkish and
Greek languages in schools and to encourage joint business ventures (Cyprus Action
Network, 2003). In July 2003, HAD made a “Cinderella demonstration” at Ledra Palace
30

Through the letter, HAD demanded the establishment of a committee of Cypriot women activists. It made
a particular emphasis on the isolation and suffering of TC community (HAD, 2002).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

83

checkpoint saying “no to passports in crossing the line” (Cyprus Alternative News, 2003a).
Later in July 2003, the British Parliament member Valerie Davey gave an “Early Day
Motion” to the British House of Parliament to give support to HAD who demonstrated
against passport and ‘Cinderella’ restrictions and who look forward to a political settlement
for the island (Cyprus Alternative News, 2003b).
In March 2004, at an international congress HAD presented a paper with the title
‘Imagining a Post-Solution Cyprus: The Gender Dimension’ 31 . The paper was sent to
Annan, TC and GC authorities, guarantor powers and the EU (Cyprus Alternative News,
2004). In January 2005, the North Civil Initiative—an alliance of 32 NGOs—also joined
by HAD demanded from Annan to take the initiative to start the negotiations before 3
October 2005—start of Turkey-EU negotiations (North Civil Initiative, 2005).
Making a general assessment of HAD experience, Cockburn points out a few
problem areas. First constraint is described as communication. A smooth process was
seriously hindered by limitations created by the Green Line. Some members regarded
mono-communal meetings as recognising the partition, though members soon realised it
was impracticable to meet in Pyla very often. The virtual communication through the email caused problems such as isolation of off-line members and sometimes leading to
misunderstandings and extension of intra-group problem-solving and decision-making
processes. The second problem area has been the inclusion and status of HAD members. A
particular event—where Mail newspaper in the south published an article including
information, which could only be reached through access to the e-mail group—created
suspicions that one member was leaking information. Another incident regarding inclusion
occurred when London Cypriot Diaspora attended the workshop in London. Some
members had the idea that the diaspora community would not understand the situation
31

With the paper HAD was looking at different aspects of life from security to demilitarization, from politics
to family life, from education to media. The paper was suggesting measures to be taken for balancing the
rights of the two communities as well as both sexes (Cyprus Alternative News, 2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

84

fully and their inclusion would impede progress. The third problem area was negotiating a
common agenda. It took time for members to understand each other’s feelings. In some
occasions, southern and northern women found themselves engaged with different subjects
and threat factors. In general the key problem was lack of time and place to spend together.
Nevertheless, there has always been something urgent demanding HAD’s involvement
(Cockburn, 2004).
4.3. Rapprochement Activities Led by Turkish and Armenian Women
In March 2002, a group of women from Turkey decided to visit Armenia in order to
meet up with women from Armenia and celebrate 8 March International Women’s Day.
The visit was going to be organised by Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council
(TABDC) and funded by the Centre for Global Peace of American University (AU-CGP).
This group of women from Turkey 32 has cancelled the visit due to European Parliament’s
decision regarding the Armenian genocide. After this incident, a new group of women
under the coordination of Şule Kılıçarslan from TABDC has been built up. This women’s
group—not as big as the previous one—comprising NGO representatives, journalists,
academics and business people realised the trip to Armenia 33 (Soyak, 2004).
This women’s group, called Turkish Armenian Young Women’s Group (TAYWG)
met with its counterpart Transcaucasian Women’s Dialogue, as well as other women’s
organisations such as Armenian Association of Women with University Education, Social
Association for World’s Women and individuals such as parliamentarian Hermine
Naghdalian, former Armenian Minister of Environment, Armenian Deputy Trade Minister
and the British Ambassador for Armenia. The group was also invited to a meeting at the

32

A parliament member of Democratic Left Party (DSP) Gönül Saray and Müjgan Suver from Marmara
Group Strategic and Social Research Foundation (‘Marmara Group’ hereinafter) were supposed to organise
the initial trip (Yılmaz, 2002).
33
Group members were Şule Kılıçarslan, Serpil Yılmaz of Milliyet, Gila Benmayor of Hürriyet, Pınar Türenç
from Istanbul University, Elif Dağdeviren from ARI Association, Özlenen Sezer from Istanbul Chamber of
Commerce; and Ayşe Kızılöz, Ayşe Şemin and Meral Ekmekçioğlu as business leaders (TAYWG, 2002).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

85

Yerevan State University (TAYWG, 2002) 34 . The group spoke about the possibility of
organising an international meeting attended by both sides, as well as conducting a
research in both countries by three Turkish and three Armenian experts and producing a
joint publication covering the findings of the research (Agos, 2002).
There have been also negative incidents during the visit. The meetings arranged by
Arsen Ghazarian—co-chairperson of TABDC—to assemble Turkish and Armenian
business people was cancelled. While the group from Turkey preferred to leave political
and historic issues to politicians and historians, Armenian women demanded to handle
these issues overtly (Yılmaz, 2002). According to Gila Benmayor during the meeting, the
historical burden on Turkey’s shoulder was recalled very often. Armenians argued it was
impossible to step forward unless there is a judgement of the past claiming Turkey had an
ethical responsibility accordingly (2002).
In June 2002, Eurasia Cultural and Social Development Association (‘Eurasia’
hereinafter) was established in Istanbul. The NGO comprising only volunteer staff has
defined its main theme as betterment of relations between Turkey, Armenia and
Azerbaijan. Until recently, the NGO has not organised a trilateral meeting welcoming
Turkish, Azerbaijani and Armenian sides. Currently it is focusing more on rapprochement
possibilities between Armenia and Turkey. According to Eurasia’s viewpoint, BakuTbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline and the natural gas pipeline passing through the Caspian
Region plays a crucial role in improving economic relations between Turkey and Central
Asian countries (Eurasia, 2005). This organisation publishes a women’s magazine called
WM Women’s Magazine in cooperation with Women for Dialogue as a joint work. This
magazine is published in Armenian, English and Turkish languages and distributed in
Turkey, Europe, Armenia and the US (AU-CGP, 2005). The initial aim of producing this
34

Parallel to this activity, Marmara Group based in Istanbul and Armenian Association of University Women
based in Yerevan established a communication network. Commencing with a trip in 2002 to Yerevan by
Marmara Group, the groups plan to organise cultural activities (Benmayor, 2003; WM, 2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

86

magazine is to help women from both societies to exchange knowledge on cultural issues,
to generate a forum where women discuss women’s issues and accordingly to build the
bridge between the two societies. This project is financially supported by AU-CGP and
facilitated by David L. Phillips, who was the chairperson of TARC.
A substantial success factor of the association can be considered as the
contribution it made to the attempts to open Turkey’s border with Armenia in the air space,
indicating start of flights from Turkey to Armenia. Eurasia informs that to accomplish this
aim a private airlines company received a permission from the Turkish Foreign Ministry to
commence flights from Istanbul to Yerevan; and the association conducted the lobbying
work by establishing ties with the media. As a result, the first flight by a Turkish company
from Istanbul to Yerevan took place in October 2003. Güler Kömürcü informs that the
opening of the border in the air space was recommended by the US Secretary of State
during Gül’s visit to Washington in July 2003 (2003).
Eurasia has not established contact with the Armenian Diaspora in the US. Some of
their planned activities are organising an exhibition on empathy to be demonstrated in
Istanbul and Yerevan, contributing to activities for the restoration of Akhtamar Armenian
Church on the Lake Van, and organising a meeting in Anatolia assembling Turkish,
Armenian, Azerbaijani and Georgian business people (Eurasia, 2005).
4.4. Greek Turkish Forum (GTF)
Shortly after the Kardak/Imia crisis, the London based Roberts Centre made a
suggestion to support a second track diplomacy initiative for Greece and Turkey. In the
past, this private charitable fund focused on peace-building efforts in regions such as South
Africa and later on Middle East (Özel, 2004). Another London based research institute,
Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) agreed to provide administrative support to this
initiative. RUSI, seeking to analyse and debate issues of defence and internal security is

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

87

known as the first British defense academy totally independent of government (GTF,
1998). Jamie Bruce-Lockhard of Roberts Centre who worked in Cyprus as a press officer
gained support from Turkish an Greek ambassadors in London for preparing for the initial
meeting and choosing the participants (Özel, 2004).
At the initial conference in the UK in November 1997, participants agreed to carry
on with the work they started. This meeting was useful for participants to present their
perspectives and perceptions about/to each other. The first meeting of the Greek Turkish
Forum (GTF) planned by Bruce-Lockhart for spring 1998 was postponed due to
recommendations of Cem Duna 35 and Costas Carras 36 when the Luxembourg European
Council decided to leave Turkey out of EU candidates list. Finally, GTF commenced in
May 1998 under the coordination of retired Admiral Güven Erkaya 37 and Professor
Christos Rozakis. One of the Forum members, Soli Özel 38 expresses that Erkaya had been
actively establishing communicative links with his Greek counterpart to diffuse crises,
since he wanted to pursue a work for confidence building with Greeks (2004).
In general, the Forum aimed at conducting regular analysis of domestic and
international issues that affect bilateral relations, creating informal channels of
communication at the level of governments and political parties to improve bilateral
relations and producing ideas that can contribute to resolving specific disputes between
Turkey and Greece. The Forum recognises that Turks and Greeks are mutually
interdependent in terms of environment, tourism, security and accordingly of human, social
and economic development. The Forum also believes in the importance of encouraging
Greek and Turkish NGOs and local authorities to conduct joint-work (GTF, 1999b).
Current Greek coordinator of the Forum, Carras notes that GTF was established mainly to
35

Former Turkish Ambassador.
Greek business person, board member of Center for Democracy and Reconciliation in Southeast Europe
and founder of the Friends of Cyprus.
37
He was the navy commander during the Kardak/Imia crisis (Özel, 2004).
38
Professor at Bilgi University.
36

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

88

discuss major political issues between the two countries or any other issues affecting
Turkish-Greek relations—such as the Cyprus issue (Poyraz Doğan, 2002a). Current
Turkish coordinator of GTF İlter Türkmen 39 asserts that Greek-Turkish relations cannot be
established on a solid foundation without solving the Cyprus conflict (Poyraz Doğan,
2002b).
Bruce-Lockhard and Dan Smith from International Peace Research Institute of Oslo
(PRIO) took the responsibility of Forum moderation. In the first meeting, sub-groups were
formed to conduct work in a number of issues, these were: public opinion survey, GTF
web site, press and editorial issues, academic exchanges, documentation and history, and
confidence building measures. Due to changes in Forum members and priorities, there
remained four concrete working areas that GTF really concentrated and undertook work
on. These were: GTF web site, confidence building measures, report on Aegean, and
Cyprus issue.
The web site of the Forum 40 includes many useful materials such as press releases
and statements of the Forum, information on the progress of Forum activities, articles and
op-eds of Forum members on Turkish-Greek relations, and reports and papers prepared
and presented to respective governments. Although the Forum web site is updated last in
October 2002, it remains to be a valuable source on past and current status of TurkishGreek relations as well as on the work of GTF.
Second concrete task fulfilled by GTF has been the work to outline confidence
building measures (CBM) and crisis avoidance measures (CAM). The report outlining
suggested CBMs and CAMs released in November 1998 covered measures in three
different areas: measures on the non-governmental and inter-governmental level, measures
for peacekeeping and measures on the military level. Although the report was never made
39
40

Former Foreign Minister.
Available at www.greekturkishforum.org

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

89

public and not submitted to both governments officially, the content of the discussion was
conveyed to relevant governmental bodies (Özel, 2004).
1999 Öcalan crisis did not cause a halt in GTF’s operations. Continuing its work
without giving any break, İlter Türkmen took the responsibility as the coordinator on the
Turkish side. Meeting of both countries’ foreign ministers in New York in June 1999
provided a favourable climate for GTF to forward its work to the two ministers (Özel,
2004). As a result, ten proposals outlining measures were addressed to the two foreign
ministers on behalf of GTF participants by the directors of RUSI and PRIO (GTF, 1999a).
At the request of the Forum, the Turkish and Greek Foreign Ministers Cem and
Papandreou met respectively with the CBM group (GTF, 1999b; GTF, 1999c)
Towards the end of 1999, CBM group transformed into the Political Analysis
Group (PAG) 41 . At the end of 2000, Robert Centre and RUSI withdrew from Forum
activities due to decisions to localise the activities. PRIO remained active in setting the
agenda and facilitation of Forum meetings. Both foreign ministries provided the funds
needed for PAG meetings that would take place six times a year. Bruce-Lockhart who
retired from Roberts Centre and Dan Smith who left PRIO continued to facilitate the
process (Özel, 2004).
The third productive accomplishment of the Forum has been the report entitled
‘Issues in the Aegean: Openings and Possibilities’ dated June 2000 prepared by PAG. The
major idea in the report was to suggest both governments to start assessing their common
interests as well as each state’s particular interest rather than starting by stating legal and
political positions. Three key issues have been identified: first delimitation of the

41

Many of the initial participants left the forum. Members of the new Policy Analysis Group consisted of
Costas Carras, Constantinos Zepos (former ambassador), Theodore Couloumbis (professor, University of
Athens), Arghyris Fatouros (professor, University of Athens), Thanos Veremis (professor, University of
Athens, Paulina Lampsa (political scientist), on the Greek side; and İlter Türkmen, Ziya Bülent, Cem Duna,
Mehmet Ali Birand (journalist), Sami Kohen (journalist), Muharrem Kayhan (industrialist), Soli Özel,
Özdem Sanberk and Üstün Ergüder on the Turkish side.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

90

continental shelf, second delimitation of territorial waters and air space and third the
disputed interpretation of treaty restrictions on the militarisation of certain Greek islands.
GTF believed when first and second issues were settled, the third issues would lose its
salience, therefore it suggested not to address the third issue at that time (GTF, 2000). The
report was presented to both foreign ministries by Türkmen and Carras. It was also
submitted to EU officials in Brussels (Özel, 2004).
GTF’s fourth achievement was the work conducted on Cyprus assuming the two
countries have a common interest in resolving the Cyprus conflict. In 2002, the Forum
organised a series of meetings to help facilitate mutual exchange of information and build
mutual understanding between the two communities in Cyprus. The first meeting held in
Rome in April 2002, arranged by PRIO 42 included GTF members and members of two
communities in Cyprus from politics and business attending the meeting with no official
status. The first meeting and the second meeting held in Sofia in June 2002 were helpful to
enable two sides understand each other’s perspectives and positions. Following these
meetings, GTF decided to present its work to relevant bodies in Ankara, Athens and
Istanbul. Forum members also gained the opportunity to share their views through
conferences held at international level. The TCs and GCs who attended the meeting made a
statement sharing their concerns and hopes for the upcoming Copenhagen European
Council.
According to Özel, the Greek Foreign Ministry was more interested and engaged in
the work of GTF from the beginning, though the Turkish Foreign Ministry continued
providing financial resources for Forum activities. In his words “whatever success the GTF
may have registered could not have been achieved without the tacit support of the two
governments” (2004). According to PRIO, the GTF’s reports:
42

Since 1997, PRIO has been implementing a project called “Cyprus Initiative” to facilitate work of a group
of busines leaders. The project is supported by the UN as well (PRIO, 2005).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

91

have been well received by official circles and have been used by Forum members in writing
for the press in Greece and Turkey. In early 2002, the Greek and Turkish Foreign Ministers
made public statements about using a mixture of political and legal means for resolving the
Aegean issues, which is quite similar to the methodology proposed by the Forum (PRIO,
2005).

4.5. Cyprus Consortium and Subsequent Bi-communal Activities
US based Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy 43 (IMTD)’s involvement with
Cyprus started in 1992 when Louise Diamond went to Cyprus for a fact finding mission to
see what she, as a trainer of conflict resolution could add to the peace work already done in
Cyprus. Upon holding consultations with individuals from both communities, she received
the response “not to run more problem-solving workshops, but to teach the skills of
conflict resolution” so that Cypriots themselves would learn and apply the necessary tools
for conflict resolution (Diamond, 1999: 192). Members of IMTD and National Training
Laboratories (NTL) made regular visits to the island for two years where they presented
their methods by arranging lectures and workshops on conflict resolution in both sides of
the islands in a mono-communal context (Wolleh, 2001).
The interest in these workshops led to the first bi-communal workshop by the
initiative of IMTD. This resulted with the founding of the Bi-Communal Conflict
Resolution Committee (BSC) 44 . This committee took the responsibility to coordinate all
bi-communal peace activities on the island, though at that time this included only running
the conflict resolution workshops. While the American trainers were developing the
training programs 45 , BSC was reaching out new participants for the training programs.
These activities were followed by an intensive conflict resolution training in Oxford,
England. At this training twenty participants—calling themselves the ‘Oxford Group’—
were able establish close relations with each other. The intensification of bi-communal
43

Co-founded by John McDonald and Louise Diamond, who developed the concept of multi track
diplomacy.
44
This was an informal body organized by civil individuals consisting of six TCs and six GCs (Wolleh,
2001).
45
The training workshops had two components; first training for skills and concepts of conflict resolution,
second training in project development and management.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

92

meetings in the buffer zone led to the negative comments and attacks by the media—
particularly GC media. The participants were being accused of making political
concessions. As a reaction to the news on bi-communal activities appearing in the media,
more individuals expressed interest in participating these activities (Wolleh, 2001).
Bi-communal training workshops reached a turning point when Cyprus Fulbright
Commission 46 and America-Mideast Educational and Training Services, Inc.
(AMIDEAST) 47 jointly decided to request major funding from the US Agency for
International Development (USAID) for additional training on conflict resolution. This
improvement opened the way for the establishment of the Cyprus Consortium by IMTD,
NTL and Conflict Management Group (CMG) 48 . In 1994, 200 individuals participated in
the training sessions conducted by the Cyprus Consortium. One of the workshops held in
Virginia, US was attended by public policy leaders. Also a workshop was developed for
training of trainers including members of the Oxford Group. For the period 1995-98
Cyprus Consortium received a second grant from Fulbright Commission and AMIDEAST,
which was then used to run an advanced training for trainers. This second grant was also
used for workshops for public policy leaders, students and TC and GC educators and for a
summer-camp for Cypriot teenagers in the US. In addition, the Consortium received
funding from Carnegie Corporation that was allocated to establish a study group for policy
leaders 49 . This group led to the formation of the ‘Harvard Study Group’, which dissolved

46

Fulbright is a US-based educational exchange program. The Cyprus Fulbright Commission is founded in
1962 and has a unique status in Cyprus. Its board includes Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. It has
offices in both parts of the island. Its grants are provided to students of both communities. According to
Wolleh the Commission is the only bi-communal institutionalized organization in Cyprus (2001).
47
US headquartered AMIDEAST is a private, nonprofit organization that aims to strengthen mutual
understanding between Americans and the peoples of the Middle East and North Africa. It provides English
language skills training, educational advising and testing services to students and professionals in the Middle
East and North Africa (AMIDEAST, 2005).
48
As a US based NGO, CMG provides training and consultation on conflict resolution to groups involved in
ethnic conflict. It has close ties with Harvard University.
49
Dutch and Canadian Governments partially contributed to this program.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

93

in 1998. This group was considered as a “track-one-and-half” activity not depending on the
training activities (Wolleh, 2001).
Throughout this process, the number of participants in bi-communal activities grew
continuously. All these workshops and courses incited the development of other bicommunal civic groups. Since none of the Consortium members were represented on the
island permanently, local activists took the lead for skill building; on the other hand the
task of group building process was taken by the Cyprus Fulbright Commission (Wolleh,
2001). For example, in 1997 the Fulbright Commission constructed a special building on
the buffer zone so as to provide a meeting space for bi-communal training workshops and
inter-communal talks (IMTD, 2001). Parallel to the process, there emerged an informal
network of American actors who were supporting the trainers group in their peace work.
These consisted of the Consortium, American Embassy and American Center in Nicosia,
the Fulbright Commission and the Resident Scholar of the Fulbright Commission (Wolleh,
2001).
In 1994, Fulbright Resident Scholar Benjamin J. Broome initiated a ‘Design
Workshop’ attended by GC and TC individuals from the trainers group. This group 50
worked together to develop a strategy with a set of activities for their peace-building
efforts. The group worked in a nine-month period engaging in interactive problem-solving
and design sessions. The design sessions resulted with a document called ‘Collective
Vision Statement for Peace Building Efforts in Cyprus’ 51 . During the process the
participants had to face the social pressure to avoid contacts with the “other”. Participants
were sometimes accused of being ‘used’, ‘naïve’ or ‘traitors to the nation’. Many of them
became negatively affected in their career, social and family life. There was even physical
50

This group consisted of 15 TCs and 15 GCs There were nine men and six women in each group. They
came from fields of education, business, counseling and civil service (Broome, 2004).
51
Before concluding the collective vision statement, there were many discussions and in some cases
deadlocks on issues like Cypriotness, demilitarization of the island, disparity in the economic situation of the
two communities and status of properties (Broome, 2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

94

damage to the property of participants. The group concluded that first there needed to be
stronger ties with track one actors, second cultural and social relations between the two
communities should be encouraged and third more people should be included in bicommunal peace activities so as to create a greater voice. Generating 245 project ideas, the
group selected 15 projects to be implemented. Most of the planned activities were realised
in some form (Broome, 2004).
Soon afterwards the group referred to itself as ‘Conflict Resolution Trainer Group’
(‘Trainer Group’ hereinafter) transforming into a permanent working group of trainers
(Wolleh, 2001). When the Trainer Group’s confidence in its skills and abilities increased,
new groups and workshops followed without the participation of the Consortium. There
were many bi-communal groups formed by the Trainer Group 52 within this phase (Wolleh,
2001).
1996 violent acts in the buffer zone yielded concern among members of bicommunal groups. Though direct communication was halted the Trainer Group agreed to
give signals for reconciliation. During this phase direct communication could only occur
via Fulbright Scholar Broome. UN was convinced that a certain number of people from
both communities were eager to oppose violence and the ongoing hate speech. This led to a
bi-communal reception organised by the UN in Ledra Palace in September 1996. Oliver
Wolleh notes while the international community perceived violent acts of 1996 as
escalation of Cyprus conflict, the world press showed no interest to this bi-communal
gathering. In the following month an enormous bi-communal event took place on the
celebrations of the anniversary of UNFICYP joined by three thousand bi-communalists.
After US government’s political involvement, the TC administration lifted the blockade

52

In this phase following bi-communal groups were formed: Educators Group, Citizens Group, Federation
and EU Study Group, Peace Concert, Cultural Evening Planning Group, “Letters to the other side” Group,
Technology for Peace, Management Group, Women Group, Young Political Leaders Group, Students Group
I and Lawyers Group (Wolleh, 2001).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

95

against bi-communal meetings in the buffer zone. Conducting further meetings, another set
of projects was created which later helped forming new groups 53 (Wolleh, 2001).
In December 1997 when TRNC authorities decided to cease permissions to crosscommunal contacts, it became clear that bi-communal activities would be cut-off in the
long run. At this time, a debate on ‘how to restructure the Trainer Group’ started. The
initial plan—set up by the Fulbright Scholar—was to form a civil movement that is labour
divided and growth oriented and that was suggesting no institutionalisation. Continuing the
debate for several weeks, the original members of Trainer Group withdrew from meetings
finding the Americans too “pushy”. With the new era, the meetings moved from Ledra
Palace to Pyla 54 and the involvement of the US network became indirect or absent in some
cases. It was the youth groups and Hade Magazine group who often used Pyla as a meeting
point (Wolleh, 2001). In 1999, the work of the Consortium moved into a more track-two
characteristic. It joined forces with the World Peace Foundation. Thirteen leaders from
both the GC and TC communities—composed of politicians, business leaders, and current
and former officials—met several times to delve into subjects for a successful and
sustainable peace process in Cyprus (IMTD, 2001).
Making a general assessment Wolleh asserts there were unwritten rules of bicommunal groups. These were equal representation of both communities, equal
participation of women and men, inclusion of left-wing and right-wing oriented
individuals, informality and English as the working language. The last characteristic was
causing only educated middle class elite to be integrated into bi-communal work (Wolleh,
2001). Cockburn notes that IMTD and Fulbright Commission had no “explicit policy on
the inclusion of women” though “gender balance appears to have been the usual practice”

53

In this phase, following groups were formed: Citizens Group II-VII, Brussels Women Group, Co-Villager
Project, Youth Encounters for Peace, Youth Environmentalists, Hade Magazine, Artists Group, Federalism
Group, Students Group II and Environmental Group (Wolleh, 2001).
54
In Pyla, the police and secret services were closely watching the bi-communalists.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

96

(2004: 152). It should be noted that some members of Hands Across Divide (HAD)—an
established and constituted NGO—were members or initiators of some bi-communal
groups (Cockburn, 2004). Another important characteristic of bi-communal activities is
that none of them led to the formation of an institutional body, though the Trainer Group’s
four project ideas out of fifteen were bi-communal institutions. The absence of a financial
structure causes the possibility to raise funds to vanish. On the other hand the management
of funds for bi-communal projects provided by the EU belongs to the Planning Bureau in
the south (Wolleh, 2001).
Some success indicators of the process started with the formation of the Cyprus
Consortium can be listed as: the continuation of Trainer Group’s project to ‘have an article
published in the press of the other community’; the founding of the ‘Bureau of BiCommunal Reconciliation and Strengthening of Civil Society’ by DISY; bi-communal
activities being more independent and less dependent on foreign support and funding; a
growth in internal support and funding; and in general a significant increase in bicommunal activities especially those joined by the Cypriot youth (Wolleh, 2001). IMTD
reports that since their involvement in Cyprus, an estimated number of 2.500 individuals
were trained in conflict resolution skills (2001). IMTD further informs that the TC person
who was the architect of the decision to open the Green Line for crossings in April 2003
was one of the participants of the training program provided by IMTD between 1992-93 55 .
He was involved in peace negotiations with the Greek Cypriots prior to referenda of 2004
(IMTD, 2003).
4.6. Turkish-Armenian Reconciliation Commission (TARC)
Following a number of meetings held under the auspices of the Diplomatic
Academy in Vienna, TARC was established in Geneva by six Turkish and four Armenian

55

Referring to Serdar Denktaş who was the Turkish Cypriot Deputy Prime Minister at that time.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

97

members 56 in July 2001. The Commission mainly aimed at promoting mutual
understanding and good will between Turks and Armenians and encouraging improved
relations between two countries. One of its objectives was to develop recommendations to
be submitted to concerned governments. In its first meeting the commissioners decided to
support second track diplomacy activities in the fields of business, tourism, culture,
education and research, environment and media (TARC, 2001).
Described as one of the track two projects of the Centre for Global Peace of the
American University (AU-CGP), it was reported that the TARC project was going to be
implemented between July 2001- July 2003 with the funding provided by the university
(AU-CGP, 2005). David L. Phillips 57 took the role of chairperson of the Commission.
The day following TARC’s commencement, New York Times has reported on the
unofficial commission and its intentions by making references to some of its members’
viewpoints. This fast-established link with the media meant that Commission’s existence
was made public to the international community, particularly the Armenian Americans.
The article was also informing that US State Department supported the initiative (Frantz,
2001). It was observed that the Turkish media chose an indifferent position to TARC’s
establishment, though the rare news articles that appeared on the Commission did not
contain any antagonistic elements. In contrast, in later phases Armenian media, particularly
the Armenian American assumed a radical approach to such a degree that TARC’s
Armenian members were condemned, urged to resign from the initiative and were accused
of being traitors to the nation.

56

Founding members are Gündüz Aktan (Ankara- former Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs), Alexander
Arzoumanian (Yerevan- former Foreign Minister), Üstün Ergüder (Istanbul- former rector of Boğaziçi
University), Şadi Ergüvenç (Istanbul- former general in the Turkish Air Force), David Hovhannissian
(Yerevan- Former Minister of Regional Issues), Van Z. Krikorian (New York- chairman of the Armenian
Assembly of America), Andranik Migranian (Moscow- Armenian adviser to President Putin of Russia),
Özdem Sanberk (Istanbul- former Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs), İlter Türkmen (Istanbul- former
Foreign Minister) and Vamık D. Volkan (Charlottesville- professor, University of Virginia).
57
He is the Deputy Director of the Center for Preventive Action at the Council on Foreign Relations.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

98

The Armenian Assembly of America has been one of the few Armenian groups to
approve the Commission, hence the organization replaced Krikorian—one of TARC
members—as its chairperson when public criticism against TARC rose up (Armenian
Weekly Online, 2003).
Armenian Foreign Ministry stated “Armenia has always welcomed public
initiatives aimed at improved Armenian-Turkish relations” though public dialogue was
considered not as a substitute for direct talks on the government level. TARC was backed
by the Social Democratic Party and Democratic Liberal Party while Dashnaksutyun Party
opposed the initiative (Armenia Diaspora Conference, 2001a). Armenian President
Kocharian stated in September 2001 he is in full support of initiations like TARC that try
to strengthen ties between the two societies though there should be considerable
cautiousness in such attempts (Zaman, 2001).
In November 2001, commissioners from Turkey—through their op-eds or making
links with the media—invited the Turkish government to open the border with Armenia
and abolish visa requirements for Armenian citizens. Towards the end of 2001, the
Commission has experienced one of its turning points when it made a request from the
International Center for Transitional Justice 58 (ICTJ) to make an independent legal analysis
on the applicability of the ‘UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide’ to events that occurred during the early twentieth century. This request
rendered a crisis in TARC’s internal relations. According to one observation point, Turkish
government pressured the Turkish commissioners to withdraw the request for the legal
analysis, to another viewpoint, Turkish members of the Commission argued Armenian
members broke their promise of not sharing information with the public until the legal
analysis was finalised. According to another argument, Armenian commissioners used the
58

A New York based human rights organisation. It is financially supported by organisations such as Ford
Foundation, MacArthur Foundation, Carnegie Corporation of New York, Open Society Institute, Hewlett
Foundation and Rockefeller Brothers Fund (ICTJ, 2005).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

99

request for legal analysis as a pretext to resign from the initiative since they were pressured
and threatened by the Armenian Diaspora. As a result, in December 2001 the Commission
suspended its activities due to disturbed mutual trust in internal relations.
In July 2002, members of TARC gathered in Turkey deciding for the finalisation of
the legal analysis. In February 2003, the analysis concluded by ICTJ stated that the events
occurred in 1915 can “be said to include all of the elements of the crime of genocide as
defined in the [Genocide] Convention, and legal scholars as well as historians, politicians,
journalists and other people would be justified in continuing to so describe them”. Though
the “Convention contains no provision mandating its retroactive application… Therefore,
no legal, financial or territorial claim arising out of the Events could successfully be made
against any individual or state under the Convention” (TARC, 2003: 4).
Along the path paced by TARC, viewpoints containing harsh criticism and
antagonism have intensified mainly originating from the radical wing of the Armenian
Diaspora. It was often expressed that TARC’s real intention was to weaken the campaign
for the acknowledgement of the genocide. The newly established Armenian Turkish
Rapprochement Forum (FRAT) based in France and all other initiatives to restore relations
between Armenians and Turks were considered by the radical Diaspora members to be
destined to fail like TARC did in the past.
The Armenian Diaspora also regarded US’s stance on the issue with bitterness. US
President G.W. Bush was blamed to break his February 2000 presidential campaign pledge
to properly recognise Armenian genocide in his April 24—the annual remembrance day of
the events—statement of 2003. Bush used the phrase ‘horrible tragedy’ 59 , although he was
constantly encouraged by the Chief of Staff and other 167 members of the Congress to use
the word ‘genocide’. This occasion caused Armenian activists to go berserk. It is argued

59

In his 2004 statement, Bush used the phrase ‘annihilation’ and in 2005 ‘great calamity’.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

100

that Bush was referring to TARC, when he used the words “our wise and bold friends from
Armenia and Turkey who are coming together in a spirit of reconciliation” (Doyle, 2003).
In June 2003, the Commission met in Istanbul. During the meeting, members
agreed on the construction of TARC’s web site. The issues of opening of sealed borders,
TARC’s future activities, the denial of Armenian genocide in the Turkish educational
curricula and establishment of diplomatic relations were discussed in the meeting (Noyan
Tapan, 2003). Due to Aktan, Ergüvenç, Sanberk and Volkan’s cease of attachment with the
Commission five new Turkish members 60 joined the Commission. Joseph Montville 61 was
welcomed as the coordinator of the Commission.
In June 2003, talks between the two Foreign Ministers Abdullah Gül and Vartan
Oskanian took place, where they conveyed the message of improving bilateral ties. TARC
was very content with this meeting thus it could not be exposed whether TARC had any
role in the holding of the Gül-Oskanian meeting (Danielyan, 2003).
In January 2004, TARC members met in London. At this meeting, they discussed
issues such as possible benefits stemming from TARC’s continuation in the future,
translation of ICTJ analysis into Turkish, improvement of the web site, and search for new
funding resources due to fully used financial resources (Turan, 2004).
Due to withdrawal of Armenian commissioner from Moscow, the number of
Armenians in the Commission dropped to three. Meeting in April 2004 in Moscow with
three Turkish and three Armenian members, it was announced that TARC as a
Commission ended its work. The meeting report declared that “TARC’s term was to be
one year, but the course of events required a longer period to accomplish” its goals our

İlter Turan (Istanbul- professor, Bilgi University), Şule Kut (Istanbul- professor, Bilgi University), Emin
Mahir Balcıoğlu (Istanbul- culture and arts expert), Ersin Kalaycıoğlu (Istanbul- professor, Işık University)
and Ahmet Evin (Istanbul- professor, Sabancı University).
61
Former US Diplomat. He first coined the term second track diplomacy and made valuable contributions to
the scholarly work in the field. He is from the Center for Strategic International Studies (CSIS) based in
Washington D.C.
60

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

101

goals. At this meeting TARC reviewed its progress toward reconciliation and finalized a
series recommendations to be conveyed to respective governments. The Commission
decided to assemble an initial meeting of a larger group to discuss the issue of TurkishArmenian reconciliation. It also planned to support a Turkish-Armenian consultative group
to meet at least annually “to exchange views, review progress, and recommend actions to
promote improved relations” (TARC, 2004). Though TARC’s web site is still online, it
does not contain recommendations to concerned government. However, Phillips in his
recently published book revealing the work of TARC reports that recommendations were:
-

Official contacts should be further improved.
Opening of the Turkish Armenian border should be announced and implemented in
2004.
The two governments should publicly support civil society programs focused on
education, science, culture, and tourism.
Standing mechanisms for cooperation on humanitarian disaster assistance and
health care should be established.
Security and confidence building measures between Turkey and Armenia should be
enhanced.
Religious understanding should be encouraged.
The Turkish and Armenian people need to develop more confidence that their
governments are working to surmount the difficulties related to the past (Phillips,
2005: 153-154).

Phillips’s book was criticised by Armenians mainly Armenian American
community as an attempt to reveal TARC’s anti-Armenian intent (Sassounian, 2005).
4.7. Turkish-Greek Business Council (TGBC)
The Turkish-Greek Business Council (TGBC) was founded in 1988 in the wake of
Davos meeting of two countries’ Prime Ministers Andreas Papandreou and Turgut Özal.
Established under the Foreign Economic Relations Board (DEİK) umbrella, the Council
started its dialogue first with the Athens Chamber of Commerce and Industry and
continued it with the Union of Hellenic Entrepreneurs (Association of Young Greek
Businessmen). Currently, the Council is working with its Greek counterpart, Council of
Greek-Turkish Business Cooperation chaired by Panagiotis Koutsikos. TGBC is currently
chaired by Selim Egeli.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

102

After commencement, the Greek counterpart of the Council has fallen into inertia,
while the Turkish counterpart has not suspended its activities due to the persistence of its
then chairperson Rahmi Koç. In 1996, the Council—accompanied by a Turkish delegation
consisting of 60 business people—met its Greek counterpart in Athens. At the meeting, it
was stressed there was a need to build closer ties between business people in two countries,
but that should be a gradual process, since time was needed to develop mutual respect and
inter-personal relations. It was suggested to conduct joint-businesses in third countries—
Balkans, Black Sea region and Middle East—until political difficulties were overcome.
The issues of maritime tourism and maritime transport, cooperation to decrease sea
pollution, supplying water to eastern Aegean islands from Turkey and strategic alliances
between Turkish and Greek companies were among other issues discussed during the
meeting. Koç mentioned that politicians could not ignore them when economic ties
between the countries strengthen (Drakopoulos, 1997; Athens News Agency, 1996).
After the 1999 Öcalan crisis, Koç made a written statement saying “protection and
support of terrorist organizations is not acceptable from any country and that it had been
revealed that Greece has protected and supported terrorism”. Thereby, the Council
cancelled all its joint activities planned with Greece. According to Koç, this case was the
result of Greece’s hostile stance against Turkey that has been harming Turkish-Greek
relations (TDN, 1999).
In September 1999, the Council resumed its activities by assigning Şarık Tara to
the chairperson of the Council. This development was highly affected by the June 1999
meeting of both countries’ foreign ministers and the rapprochement process following
1999 Marmara earthquake (Türk, 1999). In November 1999, US President Clinton shared
his happiness with TGBC’s recommencement of operations. He noted that the central

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

103

challenge was to build stronger economic ties between Turkey and Greece serving for the
larger effort for reconciliation (The White House, 1999).
Tara was considered as a person who insistently holds the olive branch in his hand.
He expressed the necessity for strengthening ties between the Greek and Turkish societies
through attempts undertaken by businessmen, civil society organisations and artists. He
stated that the proclamations such as “the Turk doesn’t have a friend other than a Turk”
were creating unproductive policies. He asserted that partnerships with no economic
cooperation were destined to be temporary. In its new term, the Council identified tourism
and maritime transport as priority areas in economic cooperation (Odabaşı, 1999).
The chairperson of the Greek counterpart of Council, Koutsikos believed that
business circles could play a crucial role in crisis situations in Greek-Turkish relations. He
emphasised the Council’s willingness to support officials to overcome difficulties in two
countries relations. He admitted that problems had been maintained for four hundred years,
and argued only in one year the Council had more accomplishments than that in forty years
time. Business people were faced with no bureaucratic barriers; chambers of commerce
were supporting business people fully; and conducting bi-lateral business was not
perceived dangerous. Consequently, he claims that trade volume increased by 45 % within
the last year (Hürriyet, 2000).
In year 2002, Koutsikos informed that a number of sixty Greek companies were
cooperating with Turkish companies to invest in Turkey and the number was increasing. In
Greece, companies working particularly in financial and telecommunication sectors were
highly interested in investing in Turkey. It was noted that some Greek banks already had
investments in Turkey and some were planning to do so. Turkish and Greek business
people were making the remarks that they were assuming the political support for TurkishGreek business relations to engage in joint-investments (Hürriyet, 2002). In year 2001,

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

104

twenty Greek companies invested in Turkey, and in 2002 forty new companies. Total
number of Greek companies investing in Turkey until 1999 was believed to be only thirty
(Greece Now, 2004).
In an interview Tara mentioned that energy, tourism and construction sectors were
most prolific for joint ventures and joint operations in both countries and in third
countries—particularly the Balkans. Information technology and light industry were
among other fertile investment areas (Proteou, 2003).
In May 2003, Turkish Energy and Natural Resources Minister and Greek
Development Ministry planned to hold a meeting accompanied by Tara and Koutsikos in
order to discuss ways to improve bilateral relations in the energy sector (HCI, 2003). The
meeting was cancelled twice due to the lack of participation from Turkish side reported by
the Athens News Agency (2003).
In year 2003 Turkey and Greece signed an agreement to lift double taxation. This
can be considered as the achievement of a campaign that started in 1999 by Greek and
Turkish business people for lifting trade barriers such as tariffs and double taxation. Taking
effect in 2005, it is expected that bilateral trade would grow at higher rates (Odabaşı, 1999;
Dünya, 2004).
Counterpart business councils assembled during Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan’s
Greece visit of May 2004. In their speeches at the Council meeting, Erdoğan and the Greek
Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis gave the message that economic relations should be
further developed. Erdoğan stated that he considered businessmen as emissaries not only in
the field of economic cooperation but in establishing a peaceful atmosphere as well.
Karamanlis emphasised that the trade volume of year 2003 was about 1,3 billion US dollar,
which was twice as much the trade volume of year 1999. He also confirmed the importance
of bilateral economic relations for Turkey and Greece, saying “business is situated beyond

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

105

diplomacy in the new era” (AKP, 2004). He stressed his intentions to examine the
possibility of Turkish-Greek cooperation in the transport of oil (Kathimerini, 2004).
4.8. Reconciliation Activities Initiated by Cypriot Business Communities
There is no structured and official council established by TCs and GCs that directly
aims to strengthen economic relations between the two business communities. On the other
hand there have been many unofficial rapprochement attempts throughout the history of
the Cyprus conflict led by the southern and northern business circles. One of them is the
establishment of the Economic Forum for the Island of Cyprus and the other is the
cooperation between the Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce (TCCC) and the Cyprus
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCCI).
In 1998, the GC and TC business people made an agreement for the preservation of
cultural and religious heritage of both parts of island (Christou, 1998). Towards the end of
1998, business people were discussing the possibilities of cooperation for providing
drinking water by pipeline from Turkey. The meeting brokered by US and Norway, was
led by Richard Holbrook who was US President Clinton's special representative for Cyprus
(Turkish Press Review, 1998).
Starting its “Cyprus Initiative” project in 1997, PRIO aimed to facilitate the work
of a group of business people in the north and south of Cyprus for their cooperation. By the
early 1999, it became clear that cooperation at the business level was highly dependent
upon achieving a political settlement, which appeared blocked at that time. In 1999, by
obtaining office space at Ledra Palace with the agreement of UN, PRIO helped a business
group to reconvene and meet with TC and GC leaders. Hence practical solutions were
lacking for cooperation between the business communities and the political conditions
were against a favourable exploration for cooperation. In December 2001, business leaders
from north and south met for the first time in several years (PRIO, 2005).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

106

On the other hand, exchanges of visits between TCCC and CCCI started
intensifying in 2001. This improvement coincides with the resumption of face-to-face talks
between the leaders Denktaş and Clerides. TCCC was officially established in 1959 and
was later internationally recognised through its membership at the International Chamber
of Commerce. The Chamber currently has 9.000 registered members. TCCC houses the
European Information Centre providing information on the EU aims to increase the
awareness of the TCs on the issues related to the EU. The president of the Chamber Ali
Erel states that there needs to be deep structural changes for the TC economy to get a
sound structure. The Chamber sees free functioning of the market and free competition to
work through EU membership process (TCCC, 2005a). CCCI on the other hand was
established in 1927. It is the federation of local chambers of commerce. Around 8.000
enterprises are members of the Chamber. In general, CCCI aims at contributing towards a
balanced growth within the framework of the EU (CCCI, 2005). The Chamber is chaired
by Vasilis Rologis.
In January 2002, at the invitation PRIO, a series of meetings between three Greek
Cypriot and three Turkish Cypriot business leaders took place in Athens 62 . The group
came to the conclusion to form a study group in order to prepare the establishment of an
“Economic Forum for the Island of Cyprus”. The Forum was supposed to support the
peace process by proposing policies to strengthen the economy of TCs and GCs and
equalize competitiveness and per capita income of two communities. These proposals
would include policies regarding the accession to the EU, education—particularly history
and language education—, environment, commerce, tourism and projects for
62

Participants of the meeting were Mustafa Damdelen (TCCC), Ali Erel (TCCC), Constantinos Lordos
(Lordos Group of Companies), Andreas Matsis, Erdil Nami (TCCC) and Nicos Severis (TCCC, 2002a).
Lordos is also a member of a group called Brussels Group—a group that first met in 1997 in Brussels by the
invitation of Richard Holbrook, it tries to promote the idea of bi-communal cooperation in many areas from
solving the water shortage to the promotion of cultural relations (Demetriou, 2000).Şarık Tara later joined the
group and explained he is interested in constructing a water pipeline from Manavgat of Turkey to northern
Cyprus (Phillips, 2005). In 2000, Lordos opened a meeting place for TCs and GCs (Wolleh, 2001).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

107

rapprochement. PRIO and GTF were expected to support the study group (TCCC, 2002a).
This initiative found coverage in the Turkish, Greek, GC and TC media. In an interview
Lordos mentioned that as a group they were not in liaison with the government, though
they were expecting both sides to be supportive. They wished to increase the number of
participants to 10 and 10 and to include personalities from the media and academia
(Christou, 2002).
In the following months, TCCC and CCCI continued their regular meetings. The
leaders of the chambers agreed to exchange proposals on the EU funds totalling an amount
of 1,5 million Euros. They declared that they made an attempt to work together in the
future to make small and medium size enterprises (SME) of the island benefit from EU
funds. They also decided that future meetings would be held either at Ledra Palace or in
Brussels (Kıbrıs, 2002). Later in February 2002, seven TC economic organisations made a
call to Denktaş and Clerides for a peace settlement. They demanded Clerides to abolish the
embargoes on the TCs and Denktaş to accept that EU was an essential part of the solution.
The business leaders also called the UN, EU and US to treat both sides equally (TCCC,
2002b).
In April, June and October 2002, at the invitation of PRIO and GTF, a set of
meetings were held in Rome, Sofia and Athens respectively. Along GTF members, these
meetings included a wider circle of participants from northern and southern parts of the
island, business leaders such Erel, Lordos and political leaders such as Mehmet Ali Talat 63 ,
Mustafa Akıncı 64 and Katie Clerides 65 . At the meetings, the focus was common interests in
Cyprus. On the last meeting, the group touched upon the shortly expected Annan Plan and
the necessity for principle, mutual acceptability and long-term sustainability for a peace

63

He is the current President and former Prime Minister of TRNC.
The leader of Peace and Democracy Movement (PDM) political party.
65
She is the Democratic Rally Party (DISY)’s Member of the Parliament and the daughter of former GC
President Clerides. She is also a member of the “Oxford Group” outlined in Chapter 4.5.
64

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

108

settlement (GTF, 2002a; GTF, 2002b; GTF, 2002c), though the issue of previously planned
‘Economic Forum for the Island of Cyprus’ was not touched upon. Later in 2002, leaders
of TCCC and CCCI met several times and sent messages to work on projects in areas of
SME development and transportation of milk and animal products from north to the south
(Cyprus News Agency, 2002a; TCCC, 2002c). In November 2002, the two chambers made
a statement calling the leaders of the two communities to negotiate on the basis of the
Annan Plan (Cyprus News Agency, 2002b; TCCC, 2002d). In the following year the two
chambers reiterated this message in various platforms.
In June 2003, TCCC joined a meeting held with the EU Commissioner Günther
Verheugen. At this meeting the Chamber made the demands for the permission for tourists
to stay overnight in the north, direct trade between the north and south, exportation from
northern harbours and the need for a peace settlement before 1 May 2004 (Yenidüzen,
2003). Towards this date, meetings between north and south Cypriot business people and
chambers of commerce intensified. In March 2004, the two chambers made a joint
declaration that the solution based on the Annan Plan should provide for a fully
functioning market economy. For developing a healthy economic environment and
monetary stability the chambers suggested the existence of a single and well functioning
central bank. They made the request for prioritising the free and fair competition all over
the island (TCCC, 2004).
In January 2005, TCCC joined other 31 northern NGOs—the North Civil
Initiative—to demand from Annan to take the initiative to start the negotiations before 3
October 2005—start of Turkey-EU negotiations (North Civil Initiative, 2005). In March
2005, the two chambers decided to form a committee to improve the Green Line trade
regulations (Arca Ajans, 2005). The committee agreed to have the Green Line trade based

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

109

on the principle of reciprocity and to have the same rules applied for products that are
transferred from south to north (TCCC, 2005b).
4.9. Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council (TABDC)
In 1997, in the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) summit held in Istanbul,
institutionalisation of economic relations between Turkey and Armenia were included in
the agenda. A group of Turkish and Armenian business people serving in logistics business
transporting food aid to Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Armenia and Tajikistan through maritime
and land transport, proposed to form a Turkish-Armenian business council. This proposal
was well taken by BSEC as well as by the businessperson Telman Ter Petrossian—the
brother of the then Armenian President. As a result, Turkish-Armenian Business
Development Council was founded with the aim of improving communication and
cooperation between Armenian and Turkish companies functioning in various sectors. The
Council established in both countries as counterpart agencies, could not be integrated into
DEİK as a formal structure since there were no diplomatic relations between the two
countries (Gültekin, 2002; Soyak, 2004). The Council is co-chaired by Kaan Soyak on the
Turkish side and Arsen Ghazarian on the Armenian side who is the president of the
Association of Armenian Businessmen and Industrialists. The Council has offices in
Istanbul, Yerevan, US and Brussels.
TABDC is in the search of strengthening business ties and interactions between
Armenia, central, eastern and southeastern Anatolia and the Armenian Diaspora. The
Council aims at mobilising the Diaspora in the interest of both Turkey and Armenia
(TABDC, 2005).
From 1997 to this date, the Council has gained many accomplishments. TABDC
has organized a number of mutual business trips in Armenia and Turkey attended by
business people and business associations of both countries. It started an initiative for the

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

110

opening of a Turkish Airlines office based in Yerevan and start of regular flights between
the two countries. The Council helps organising tours for Diaspora Armenians as well as
non-Armenian tourists in Central, Eastern and Southeastern Anatolia. TABDC is engaged
in the project to restore Akhtamar Church situated on the Van Lake, where Istanbul
Chamber of Commerce undertakes the financial part of the project. The Council is
involved in other cultural activities such as traditional and classical music concerts, folks
dance performances and music album productions connecting artists of both societies.
TABDC established direct contacts between Yerevan State University and Middle East
Technical University based in Ankara. In 1999, the two universities signed a memorandum
for academic cooperation to open the way for student exchanges and academic trips
(TABDC, 2005). Nevertheless, the protocols between universities did not permit a
functioning cooperation between Armenian and Turkish academic circles (Gültekin, 2002).
In 1999, the Council forwarded a suggestion to the then Turkish President
Süleyman Demirel to initiate a Commission led by Turkish and Armenian historians to
conduct an independent and impartial academic study on the events of 1915 (Soyak 2004).
In January 2004, Turkish History Institution and the National Academy of Sciences of
Armenia under the auspices of Vienna University have started a joint-study to delve into
1915 events under the name of ‘Vienna Armenian-Turkish Platform’ (VAT). It was
informed that Turkish and Armenian historians were preparing to exchange documents for
mutual investigation. It was planned that the platform would start discussing the issue in
the beginning of 2005, using these documents as final sources (Milliyet, 2003; Akyol,
2004). After exchange of documents, the meeting for reviewing the documents had to be
shifted to an uncertain date due to Armenian historians’ cancellation of their attendance
(Erdinç, 2005).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

111

TABDC works with businessmen associations and chambers of commerce in Kars
and Iğdır—border provinces negatively affected by the border closure. The Council tries to
connect the links between merchants and entrepreneurs from both sides. The Council
considers Armenian Diaspora members as potential investors and commercial mediators.
TABDC undertakes lobbying activities for the opening of the Turkish-Armenian border,
since it perceives political and economic issues in relations between two countries
interdependent on each other. The Council carries out activities for normalisation of
political relations and re-establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries
(Gültekin, 2002).
In year 1998, the Council made the attempt to take representatives of Turkish
companies to Yerevan for an exposition of Turkish and Armenian products. 150 Turkish
companies showed interest for participation though the event had to be cancelled due to the
intervention by the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Gültekin, 2002).
According to Noyan Soyak, the vice-chairperson of the Council, Turkey
relinquishes the opportunity to play the mediator role in resolving conflicts of the region by
not opening its border with Armenia (2004). Having conducted a valuable research on the
stakes of opening the border, Burcu Gültekin argues since Turkish products can reach the
Armenian market, the efficiency of the embargo is in question. Turkey’s choice to resort to
economic sanctions must be disputed in the sense how much Turkey is able to reach its
political objectives. The crucial point that one should be concerned about is that the
Armenian society considers Turkey’s closure as the source of their daily life problems. The
Armenian pubic perceives Turkey as a powerful country arousing fear. This fact results
with an anti-Turkish tendency among Armenian public opinion leading to circumstances
like boycotts against Turkish goods (2002).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

112

In April 2003, marking the 10th anniversary of the border closure, TABDC gave the
message of the necessity of the opening of the border and promoting economic cooperation
in the region, in a conference held in the European Parliament. The conference was
attended by officials and diplomats from EU institutions, as well as from the Embassies of
Turkey, Azerbaijan and Armenia (Abhaber, 2003). One other step that TABDC is in full
support with is the renovation of Kars- Gyumri- Tbilisi railway in reaction to Turkey’s
plans to build a new railway link from Kars to Baku (Peuch, 2003).
Noyan Soyak explains TABDC aimed to provide the necessary conditions for both
countries’ officials to hold direct talks, which turned out to be a success. The Council
preferred to undertake activities at economic, cultural and social levels putting issues of
Nagorno-Karabakh and events of 1915 aside, since it perceives these issues difficult to
resolve which must be addressed at the political level. The Council had received funding
from Centre for Global Peace of American University (AU-CGP) for some projects
implemented. Further, the Council maintains good relations with the Turkish and
Armenian Foreign Ministries as well as other relevant governmental bodies (2004).
In February 2005, Kaan Soyak invited officials of Dashnaksutyun Party to Turkey
to start a dialogue on urgent matters. He argued Dashnaksutyun was a serious political
party and he wanted to show every effort to make this dialogue possible (Kalantarian,
2005). He exerted that Azerbaijan was conducting a large-scale propaganda in Turkey; and
Azerbaijan’s position should not be a factor for the opening of the border (Mkrtchyan,
2005).

5. An Overall Assessment of the Selected Unofficial Diplomacy Activities
“Another world is possible—if we work to build it. There is a lot that has been done in the
past decades that has been tremendous, and that is continuing to be done now, every day,

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

113

in many spaces of the world. This should be learned from, celebrated, appreciated and
built upon, but much, much more is needed” (Brand-Jacobsen, 2004).

5.1. General Assessment of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives on Turkish-Greek
Conflict
The rapprochement efforts between Turkish and Greek civic organisations or
individuals dates back to 1970s and 80s with the early efforts of “Abdi İpekçi Friendship
Peace Prize” and the Turkey-Greece Friendship Association. Since most of the Turkish
NGOs are established or run in Istanbul, their geographical proximity to Greece engenders
an advantage for developing joint-efforts. From the beginning there have been many joint
rapprochement activities in academic, social, cultural and economic contexts. Currently,
there is an abundance of projects and activities between Turkish and Greek NGOs
particularly those directly targeting or directly implemented by the Greek and Turkish
youth. Greece and Turkey have a deep-rooted unofficial diplomacy history, where both
sides gained the opportunity to assess other side’s needs, past traumas, concerns and
expectations, as well as common interests. In particular, Turkey’s EU candidacy plays an
accelerating role in the reconciliation process. This acceleration is created and supported
by the EU by providing civic dialogue funds to NGOs, by the business sector, by a number
of media institutions—those in support of Turkey’s EU membership—and by both
governments. The fact that the individuals partaking Turkish-Greek rapprochement efforts
are mainly academics and journalists, the wider dissemination of relevant information and
positive messages are made possible through their respective channels. Table 1 illustrates
some of the early and current second track diplomacy efforts working for the Greek and
Turkish rapprochement.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

114

Table 1. Past and Present Examples of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives and Activities
for Turkish-Greek Rapprochement 66
Nongovernmental - Greek Turkish Forum (GTF)
/ professional
- Southeast European Cooperative Initiative (SECI)
Business
- Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC)
- Turkish-Greek Business Council (TGBC)
- Foreign Economic Relations Board (DEİK)
- Cooperation between Federation of Greek Industrialists (FGI) and
Turkish Industrialists’ and Businessmen’s Association (TÜSİAD)
- Turkey-Greece Friendship Association (TYDD)
Private citizens
- Abdi İpekçi Friendship and Peace Prize
- Women’s Peace Initiative (WINPEACE)
- AEGEE Turkish-Greek Civic Dialogue Program
- The VEN Volunteers Association conducting Turkish-Greek culture
and arts festivals
- Greek-Turkish arts festivals conducted by Daphne Association
- Cultural heritage projects by the Lausanne Treaty Emigrants
Foundation (LMV)
- Turkish-Greek Student Society (TurGreSoc)
- Zülfü Livaneli conducting cultural dialogue with Greek artists
- The International Peace Research Institute of Oslo (PRIO)
Research,
- Halki International Seminars organised by the Hellenic Foundation
training and
for European and Foreign Policy (ELIAMEP)
education
- Istanbul Policy Center at Sabancı University and ELIAMEP’s
conflict resolution project for Turkish-Greek university students
- Improvement of Balkan History Textbooks Project of the History
Foundation of Turkey
- Joint History Project of Center for Democracy and Reconciliation in
Southeast Europe (CDRSEE)
- Research projects and workshops by the European Union and
Border Conflicts: The Impact of Integration and Association
(EUBORDERCONF) on Greek-Turkish relations
- Summer school project of İstanbul Bilgi University for Greek and
Turkish university students
- Studies and books by Hercules Millas on Greek-Turkish relations
Funding/ Support - Turkish Foreign Ministry
- Greek Foreign Ministry
- EU Turkish-Greek Civic Dialogue Program
- EU Interreg III Cross Border Cooperation Programme between
Turkey and Greece
- PRIO
- Royal United Services Institute (RUSI)
- Roberts Centre
Communications - Media cooperation project run by the European Centre for Common
66

Please note that these examples are merely limited to the research conducted by the author. There are many
other peacemaking efforts not reflected on this table. The grouping is inspired by the multi-track diplomacy
concept of Diamond and McDonald (1996), hence activism (track six) and religion (track seven) are omitted
from the list.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

115

and the media

Ground (ECCG)
- Conference of the Turkish-Greek Journalists by the “Contact Group”

5.2. General Assessment of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives on Cyprus Conflict
The official diplomacy efforts mainly led by the UN throughout the conflict history
of the island did not prioritise addressing the deep-rooted fears and needs of both
communities and the deep inter-communal mistrust. Early unofficial diplomacy efforts
date back to 1966 when the UN mediation process came to a halt. Starting with the
controlled communication facilitated by John Burton, Cyprus issue functioned as a
laboratory for many of the institutes of interactive problem-solving and conflict resolution.
Beginning 1990s, particularly the establishment of Cyprus Consortium and inauguration of
bi-communal activities led to wider communal involvement in peacemaking activities.
Continual meetings of bi-communal groups constructed an atmosphere where participants
were able to address the traumas of the past, sources of mistrust, their needs and fears, and
demands from the other side. The grassroots reconciliation efforts possess a courageous,
continuous and demanding characteristic. The continuous support of governments of UK
and US, and the UN and in the new era the support of the EU is one other significant
aspect of unofficial and bi-communal peace activities in Cyprus. Table 2 illustrates some
of the early and current second track diplomacy efforts targeting the TC and GC
rapprochement.

Table 2. Past and Present Examples of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives and Activities
for Turkish Cypriot-Greek Cypriot Rapprochement 67
Nongovernmental - Early interactive conflict resolution workshops by: Centre for the
Analysis of Conflict- University College London (John Burton);
/ professional
Leonard Doob of Yale; Herbert Kelman of Harvard; International
Negotiation Network at the Carter Center; Canadian Institute for
International Peace and Security Studies (Ronald J. Fisher)
- Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy (IMTD)
67

Please note that these examples are merely limited to the research conducted by the author. There are many
other peacemaking efforts not reflected on this table.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

116

Business

-

Private citizens

-

-

Research,
training and
education

-

Funding/ Suport

-

Cyprus Consortium
Greek Turkish Forum (GTF)
Economic Forum for the Island of Cyprus
Brussels Group
Cooperation between Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce
(TCCC) and Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCCI)
Turkish Industrialists’ and Businessmen’s Association (TÜSİAD)
Cyprus Employers and Industrialists Federation (OEB)
TRNC Businessmen Association (İŞAD)
Bi-Communal Conflict Resolution Committee
Oxford Group
Conflict Resolution Trainer Group
Bi-communal groups phase I: Educators Group, Citizens Group,
Federation and EU Study Group, Peace Concert, Cultural Evening
Planning Group, “Letters to the other side” Group, Management
Group, Women Group, Young Political Leaders Group, Students
Group I and Lawyers Group
Bi-communal groups phase II: Citizens Group II-VII, Brussels
Women Group, Co-Villager Project, Youth Encounters for Peace,
Youth Environmentalists, Artists Group, Federalism Group,
Students Group II and Environmental Group
‘Common Vision Initiative’ supported by 86 NGOs
‘This Country is Ours Platform’ supported by 92 NGOs
‘The North Civil Initiative’ supported by 32 NGOs
Citizens’ Movement for Re-unification and Co-existence
Hands Across the Divide (HAD)
Turkish-Greek Student Society (TurGreSoc)
New Cyprus Association
Youth Promoting Peace (Y2P)
“Cyprus Initiative” project of PRIO
Research projects and workshops by the EU and Border Conflicts:
The Impact of Integration and Association (EUBORDERCONF) on
Cyprus issue
Research projects of the Hellenic Foundation for European and
Foreign Policy (ELIAMEP)
Research projects of Turkish Economic and Social Studies
Foundation (TESEV) on Cyprus issue
Education for Peace Project conducted by Project Oriented
Searching Team (POST)
United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS)
UN Development Programme (UNDP)’s Bi-communal
Development Programme
EU Partnership for the Future Programme
America-Mideast Educational and Training Services (AMIDEAST)
UK High Commission
US State Department
Cyprus Fulbright Commission
Carnegie Corporation
Slovak Embassy

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

117

Communications
and the media

-

Norwegian Government
Canadian Government
Dutch Government
PRIO
Soap operas for children produced by Common Ground
Hade Magazine as a bi-communal project
Young Cypriot journalists training program conducted by HasNa
HasNa Journal
Technology for Peace (TFP) project as a bi-communal project

5.3. General Assessment of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives on Turkish-Armenian
Conflict
With the freeze of diplomatic relations between Armenia and Turkey, citizens’
diplomacy efforts started becoming visible mid-1990s. Establishment of the TurkishArmenian Business Development Council (TABDC) in 1997 is one of the first courageous
attempts for rapprochement particularly on the economic context. The common point of
civic formations aiming to ease tension between Turkey and Armenia is the campaign for
border opening between Armenia and Turkey. There are only a few NGOs in Turkey that
put Armenian-Turkish reconciliation into their agenda, possibly due to the controversy
created by the genocide issue and partly due to lack of Turkish NGOs’ experience in
liasing with NGOs in Turkey’s east neighbouring countries. The encouragement of the EU
for NGO partnerships does not embrace the cooperation between Turkish and Armenian
NGOs. Any type of unofficial peacemaking attempt in geographical context encounters the
opposition and resistance of the radical nationalistic Armenian approach, mainly stemming
from the Armenian Diaspora. The genocide issue stands in the way of second track
diplomacy efforts as one big obstacle to overcome, as is the source of stalemated TurkishArmenian political relations. The support of US is one other significant character of
Turkish-Armenian citizens’ rapprochement activities. Table 3 illustrates some of the early
and current second track diplomacy efforts working for the Armenian-Turkish
rapprochement.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

118

Table 3. Past and Present Examples of Unofficial Diplomacy Initiatives and Activities
for Turkish-Armenian Rapprochement 68
Nongovernmental - Turkish-Armenian Reconciliation Commission (TARC)
/ professional
- Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC)
Business
- Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council (TABDC)
- Association of the Industrialists and the Businessmen in Kars
(KARSİAD)
- Iğdır Chamber of Commerce
- Trabzon Chamber of Commerce
- Turkish Armenian Young Women’s Group (TAYWG)
Private citizens
- Eurasia Cultural and Social Development Association
- Armenian Turkish Rapprochement Forum (FRAT)
- Initiatives of Helsinki Citizens Assembly for Turkish-Armenian
Dialogue
- Armenia trip of the civic initiative called ‘East Conference’ (Doğu
Konferansı)
- Joint-activities between Marmara Group Strategic and Social
Research Foundation and Armenian Association of University
Women
- Project to restore Akhtamar Church
- Peace Initiative/ Turkey
- Armenians of Turkey actively contributing to mutual understanding
- Research on “Armenian and Turkish Citizens’ Mutual Perceptions
Research,
and Dialogue” undertaken by TESEV
training and
- Vienna Armenian-Turkish Platform (VAT)
education
Funding Support - The Track Two Program on Turkey and Caucasus of the Centre for
Global Peace of American University (AU-CGP)
- US State Department
- RUSI
- Diplomatic Academy of Vienna
Communications - Agos Newspaper
- Joint activities of Yerevan Press Club and the Association of
and the media
Diplomacy Correspondents in Ankara
- Caucasian Forum’s “Journalists for Peace” training project for
Turkish, Armenian and Azerbaijani journalists

5.4. Overall Assessment of Second Track Diplomacy Cases Outlined in the Thesis
In this chapter, an overall analysis and assessment of the chosen civil diplomacy
cases will be illuminated. For gathering data for their book Multi-Track Diplomacy,
Diamond and McDonald answered questions of “mission, mandate, source of funds,
68

Please note that these examples are merely limited to the research conducted by the author. There are many
other peacemaking efforts not reflected on this table.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

119

structure, activities, products, results, difficulties, strengths, place in the field, future plans,
and perceived effectives” (1996: viii). For planning a second track diplomacy initiative
Gurr and Davies suggest asking the questions concerning “goals of the initiative”,
“possible points for initiating a dialogue”, relevant people “to convene a dialogue”,
“steps… needed to prepare the ground for a suitable ground”, “processes… to propose for
facilitating movement”, the framework and the process to evaluate the initiative (2002: 4647). These questions are applicable to analyse the progress of an already established and
functioning peace initiative. It is believed that most of the points proposed are already
covered in Chapter 4 for the chosen peace efforts. Though there are several other aspects
that need to be further analysed—internally as well as in comparison. These assessment
criteria are: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats (SWOT analysis in short),
relevant parties in the process of rapprochement, interaction between various track two
initiatives, their place in the field, reaction to crisis situations, continuity, confidentiality
and secrecy, gender perspective and inclusion of women, source of funds, government
relations and its approach, media relations and its reactions, capacity building and
proficiency in the field, rapprochement at societal and political levels and self-assessment.
In order to simplify the process, following abbreviations will be used for each of the cases:
-

Women’s Peace Initiative (WINPEACE)

-

Hands Across the Divide (HAD)

-

Rapprochement activities led by Turkish and Armenian women (TR-AR women)

-

Greek Turkish Forum (GTF)

-

Cyprus Consortium and subsequent bi-communal activities (CC and following)

-

Turkish-Armenian Reconciliation Commission (TARC)

-

Turkish-Greek Business Council (TGBC)

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

120

-

Reconciliation activities initiated by Cypriot business communities (TC-GC
business)

-

Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council (TABDC)

-

Turkish (TR)

-

Greek (GR)

-

Armenian (AR)

SWOT analysis
A SWOT analysis in an effective tool laying out the characteristics of any type of
group and looking at circumstances outside the control of the group that might possibly
influence its activities. Following table sketches the SWOT analysis of the chosen
unofficial diplomacy structures and activities:

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

121

Table 4. SWOT Analyses of the Chosen Unofficial Diplomacy Structures and Activities

WINPEACE

-

HAD

-

TR-AR
women

GTF

Strengths
Journalist members
Project based working
method
Implementing pilot
projects
Members active in TR-GR
women rights movements
International recognition
Lobbying skills
Occasional high media
coverage
Journalist and
trainer/educator members
Established association
structure
High media coverage
International recognition

- Joint-product: WM
Magazine
- Good relations with
women journalists
- Lobbying skills
- Continuity; capability to
continue in TR-GR crises
situations
- Support from TR-GR
foreign ministries

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

Weaknesses
- No up-to-date web site
- Insufficient wider social
support
- Not willing to be inclusive

Opportunities
Threats
- Turkey’s EU membership
- Ending of EU-funded
candidacy
projects
- Wider application of peace - Possible TR-GR crises
education and agro-tourism

- Association established
outside Cyprus
- Not working on projectbasis
- No or no-longer
functioning web site
- Exclusion of non-English
speaking individuals
- Dependent upon only one
source of finance
- No up-to-date web site

- A possible
Cyprus

- Few or no women
members
- No up-to-date web site

solution

in - Occasional negative media
response
- Threat and attack from
radical nationalists
- Possible stalemate of
Cyprus issue

- Possibility of border
- Vague TR-AR relations
opening
- Possible escalation of
- Possibility of start of
antagonistic sentiments of
diplomatic TR-AR
TR-AR societies
relations
- Turkey’s EU membership - Possible cease of support
candidacy
by the TR-GR foreign
ministries
- Possible change of
approach by TR-GR

122

CC and
following

TARC69

69

- Strong ties with track one
diplomacy and the media
- Reputable members in
media and academic circles
- Experienced former track
one diplomat members
- International recognition
- Confidentiality
- Facilitation by PRIO
- Bi-communality
- Dependent upon foreign
- Financial support from
funding
UN, US and EU
- Internet not providing up- Wide-spread local
to-date information
participation
- Exclusion of non-English
- Inclusion of women
speaking individuals
- TCs not being able to use
EU funds
- Common members of GTF - Few or no women
- Experienced former track
members
one diplomat members
- Dependent upon only one
source of finance
- Lack of self-assessment
- High membership
circulation
- No balance in the number
of TR-AR members
- Lack of confidentiality
- Lack of solidarity and trust
among members
- Web site with scarce

governments
- Possible TR-GR crises

- A possible solution in
Cyprus
- Support from local
business sectors

- Occasional negative media
response
- Threat and attack from
radical nationalists
- Possible stalemate of
Cyprus issue

Not applicable

- Threat and attack from AR
radical nationalists
- Negative AR media
coverage

Please note that TARC no longer exists, therefore there are no ‘opportunities’ outlined. ‘Threats’ column define only past threat factors.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

123

-

TGBC

TC-GC
business

TABDC

- High media coverage
- Advantage of functioning
under DEİK umbrella
- TR-GR government
support
- International recognition
and support
- Well functioning web-site
(TCCC)
- High media coverage
-

Continuity
High media coverage
Excellent web-site
Good relations with
business people in
Armenia and in border
regions of Turkey

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

-

information
Disability to protect its
members from attacks
Low TR media coverage
Few or no women
members
Vulnerable to TR-GR
crises situations
DEİK’s web site providing
scarce information

- Few or no women
members
- No established council
structure
- Few or no women
members
- No established council
structure under DEİK
umbrella

- Turkey’s EU membership
candidacy
- Increase of TR-GR trade
and investment
- Common interests of TRGR business people

- Possible TR-GR crises

- A possible solution in
Cyprus
- Development of Green
Line Trade
- Possibility of border
opening; start of border
trade
- Possibility of start of
diplomatic TR-AR
relations
- Possible opening of KarsGyumri-Tbilisi railway

- Possible
stalemate
Cyprus issue

124

of

- Vague TR-AR relations
- Possible escalation of
antagonistic sentiments of
TR-AR societies

Relevant parties
With relevant parties, those actors are meant significant in the process of peacemaking
by unofficial bodies and individuals. Relevant parties can attain their significance through
their positive, negative or indifferent approach. In most of the cases TCs and GCs are
essential and in some cases indispensable actors in TR-GR rapprochement processes. Many
TR-GR second track initiatives ensure the attendance of TCs and GCs in their activities as
observed in activities of WINPEACE, GTF and TGBC.
GCs and TCs are hesitant to include Cyprus Diaspora, as observed in HAD’s
involvement with the Diaspora. There is no evidence of inclusion of mainland Turks in bicommunal activities. As Wolleh notes “[t]he inclusion of mainland Turks would result in a
massive refusal by the Greek Cypriot society as the question of Turkish settlements in the
North is politically highly controversial and explosive” (2001: 21).
In the case of TR-AR relations, the Armenian Diaspora—mainly of US, Russia and
France—with an estimated population of seven million interfere into the reconciliation
forums, which has been very annoying throughout TARC’s life-span. Looking from this
perspective it is advisable and challenging to include the Armenian Diaspora as much as
possible considering the negative attitude of excluded actors to surmount the process.
TABDC’s willingness to attain dialogue with Armenian Diaspora and its latest attempt to
initiate dialogue with Dashnaksutyun party can lead to transformation into a productive
relation in the longer term. On the other hand, Armenians of Turkey voluntarily contribute to
the rapprochement process using their own capacities as academics, journalists or artists.
They use their historical background, knowledge and experience living along with Turks as
valuable factors giving them the capacity to understand both sides of the conflict and to ease
the process for mutual understanding.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

125

By generating alternative solutions, the civic diplomacy forums should extend to those
actors directly affected by the conflict situation and by the outcome of a peace settlement.
Interaction between various track two initiatives/ place in the field
Three TR-GR peace initiative cases analysed lack the willingness and efforts to
interact in platforms of meetings, projects and in making statements. WINPEACE, GTF and
TGBC give their maximum effort to be active in their respective field directing their voice to
their target groups, without acknowledging the possibility to strengthen their cause by having
a common voice.
TC NGOs active in the request for an immediate peace settlement in Cyprus exert
solidarity since they are connected through a common cause. There have been a number of
TC civic platforms comprising a high number of NGOs representing the needs and demands
of the majority of TC community. Hence, the TC second track initiatives have a widespread
and well-integrated nature. Three cases analysed in the thesis framework have actively
integrated into this mass peace movement.
In the current stage, TR-AR peace initiatives outlined in this research do not exercise a
high level of cooperation though they are the leading voices in the demand for opening of TRAR border. The common denominator remains to be the demands from respective
governments and the financing provided by AU-CGP.
The interaction between TR-GR, TC-GC and TR-AR peace groups is another issue to
be reviewed. WINPEACE and HAD’s interaction, TR-GR business people’s interaction with
TABDC and TC-GC business leaders, and WINPEACE’s structure allowing women
organisations working for TR-AR reconciliation leads to cross-regional knowledge and
information sharing. Personalities like İlter Türkmen, Özdem Sanberk and Üstün Ergüder as
current or former members of both GTF and TARC possibly contribute to cross-regional
interaction and carrying their experience in one forum to the other. Not to mention, these

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

126

efforts are imprisoned in their respective field of activity, i.e. women communicate with other
women organisations, so do business people and reconciliation forum members.
Reaction to crisis situations
It has been put forth many times that unofficial peace-building efforts should not be
negatively affected by crisis situations that occur in the area of involvement. These crisis
situations should neither lead to cease of activities nor to creation of internal crises. This
prescription makes sense considering the role of second track initiatives to keep dialogue
channels open and to interfere by proposing alternative ways when channels become blocked.
In times of escalation, replicating track one approach threatens the characteristic of unofficial
forums to be ‘second track’.
In TR-GR relations, unofficial initiatives’ endurance have been put to test in 1996
Kardak/Imia and 1999 Öcalan crises. Kardak/Imia crisis led to the creation of WINPEACE
and GTF, while both did not halt their activities during 1999 Öcalan crisis. In contrast, TGBC
unilaterally relinquished its activities shortly after Öcalan’s capture in Kenya. This case in
time defines the rupture between peace forums and business councils, i.e. reconciliation
forums assemble for peace as the ‘number one’ goal, while business forums consider
reconciliation as a tool for furthering their business activities. This explains why business
circles cannot pose a courageous role since that would possibly threaten their internal business
relations and transactions. Working on long-term projects also leads to become immune to
conflict escalation situations, as in the case of WINPEACE.
In TC-GC relations, there has been a long period where from time to time bicommunal activities were temporarily put on hold due to political restrictions. In crisis
situations, radical-wing media exerted more criticism on peace groups where bi-communalists
had to temporarily freeze activities for the sake of their own security.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

127

In TR-AR relations, a group of TR women cancelled their activity in Yerevan due to
European Parliament’s controversial decision affecting TR-AR relations. This decision is
highly linked with one TR member’s status of being a parliament member. This case in time
reminds us the necessity of the nature of unofficial peace efforts to be purely civic. As
discussed in Chapter 2, the closer forum members are to political decision making processes,
the more they will feel restricted and be affected and pressured by the ruling position.
Continuity
As stated in Chapter 2, continuity of unofficial peace efforts is considered as one of
the success factors, since enduring efforts can focus on long-term causes and long-range
solutions of conflicts and can produce most effective and convenient ways of spreading the
message and keeping the channels open. This is why scholar-practitioners suggest dedicating
a long time period before the take-off. Before starting a long-term effort, the participants
should define tools to resist pressure—from the government, media and various other
groups—and their position in times of conflict escalation so as to make the initiative viable.
TARC as the only defunct track two forum analysed in the thesis provides all
necessary lessons regarding continuity, attitude in times of crisis and pressure. When
initiating the dialogue, there should have been set-up mechanisms to protect commission
members from attacks from radicals opposing TR-AR rapprochement. Nevertheless, there
were some incidents that TARC’s operations itself were the cause of crises highly instigated
by the radical-wing Armenian media and Armenian Diaspora. The continuity of TARC’s
activities as well its members’ involvement with TARC would lead to a more open context for
deeper dialogue, mutual trust and creation of alternative problem-solving mechanisms.
Though, some members’ status of being former diplomats, the fracture caused by disrespect
of confidentiality and secrecy, the unwillingness of some members to compromise were some
of the reasons to blockade the continuity of the forum.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

128

Confidentiality and secrecy
Confidentiality is the golden rule if informal peace attempts are aimed to create
positive results. At the initial stage, peace forum participants as well as facilitators should
pledge to follow the rule of confidentiality and secrecy. When making decisions, forum
members should come to terms on the percentage of information that will be made public.
Those members who leak information without the consent of all forum members should
immediately be excluded from forum activities. Only in such a context can participants feel
without any pressure knowing they attend meetings at their own capacity with no official
status.
These points suggest that former diplomat members of TARC should have felt highly
pressured to defend state-led position more ambitiously the more the rules of secrecy and
confidentiality are broken. As Phillips notes, “TARC knew that information about its work
would leak out”, that explains TARC’s “proactive” media relations (2005: 51). Hence, there
have been many cases that TARC’s activities and effectiveness became jeopardised due its
members’ attitude change when sharing information with the media. In such a state, reaching
the mature state for mutual understanding, open dialogue with acknowledgement of past
sufferings and forgiveness and finally reaching a consensus becomes impossible. In
comparison, academic members of TARC should have felt less pressure relying on scholarly
work being detached from the slippery slope of diplomacy.
Continuing with TARC as the most significant example for this assessment criterion,
one might say this issue became more controversial when David L. Phillips’s book revealing
many details on TARC’s story was published. The book not only exhibits excerpts from the
minutes of forum meetings but shares information on very personal and deep moments that
participants would not feel comfortable to have them made public. At this stage, one can
doubt if the nature of the book—highly relying on the principle of transparency—serves the

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

129

aim of track two diplomacy—especially considering the forum was initially dominated by
former government officials—since it probably put former members into a highly difficult
position. This fact will presumably deter individuals to commence new initiatives for TR-AR
reconciliation. As supported by the words of Phillips “if we failed, there might not be another
for many years to come” (2005: 51). We may argue that there is a dividing line between
secrecy and transparency, though it is the facilitators of interactive conflict resolution
workshops who are supposed to be of utmost reliability and trustworthiness; and second prior
to sharing any information or statement with the public, all forum members must be content
with it, even though the initiative has ceased its activities. Otherwise, the members would start
acting and talking like track one diplomats, as explained above. We can question whether
TARC exhibits the example of a genuine track two diplomacy initiative, since some of its
characteristics contradict with the nature of track two diplomacy. As Phillips put it “[l]ike
some TARC members, I too was using my government connections to compel progress”
(2005: 47). As coined by some scholar-practitioners, the term “track-one-and-half” well
represents TARC when taking its structure and web of relations into consideration—some
members taking orders from their respective governments, defending government position,
not tending to compromise, closed to dialogue and highly male-dominated.
Cynthia Cockburn’s The Line, revealing the life story of HAD shows us how ideally
the border line of secrecy and publicity is drawn. She refrained from providing names of those
women who were discontent to appear when their views were reflected. It must be added that
HAD does not hold the structure of a temporary interactive problem-solving workshop that
directly aims at influencing the foreign policy making.
Gender perspective and inclusion of women
WINPEACE, HAD and TR-AR women are peace initiatives led by only women
activists. Their approach considers a gender-perspective, which links conflict escalation with

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

130

the status of and attitude towards women and their exclusion or low level of participation
from decision making mechanisms. Bi-communal Trainer Group and following bi-communal
groups contained a gender balance, though IMTD and Cyprus Fulbright Commission “do not
seem to have had any explicit policy on the inclusion of women” as Cockburn notes (2004:
152). For example, Broome’s ‘Design Workshop’ contained 18 men and 12 women. As
Wolleh explains “in the North more women are organised than in the South, and sometimes
they felt noticeably hindered by the principle of equal numbers” (2001: 21).
Women are purely represented in GTF and TARC. There is only one active woman
member at GTF—namely Paulina Lampsa—and one women member at TARC—namely Şule
Kut—who joined the forum at a later stage. This disturbing gender imbalance probably
depends on the intentional preference of authorities making the invitation to individuals to
join, since people are not allowed to attend problem-solving forum without invitation. The
weak participation of women deteriorates the equal-representation rule of peace forums and
makes it no different than track one diplomacy efforts possessing a male-dominated nature
where power, dominance, insistence and competition are prioritised.
The male dominated business sector reiterates itself in peace initiatives led by business
circles. Business leaders disregard the role of women in peacemaking and do not prioritise
gender balance. TABDC is slightly exceptional by having opened the way for women
activists to celebrate 8 March Women’s Day with their counterparts in Yerevan. At TABDC’s
activities more women are involved in comparison to other business peace forums, but this
representation remains to be insufficient. In addition, it is only Turkish Cypriot Chamber of
Commerce (TCCC) that uses the term “business people” instead of “businessmen” on its web
site, presuming TCCC considers women as business people as well.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

131

Source of funds
The transparency of source of funds—financial or in-kind contribution—is one of the
rules to make the work of citizens’ peace attempts accountable and reliable. When source of
funds are made public, on one hand informal diplomats can find the space to confront attacks,
on the other they can attain the advantage to be trustworthiness. When participants keep silent
when they are asked about source of funds, actors opposing de-escalation and reconciliation
mostly use it as an opportunity to make speculations on funding. This speculation can lead to
pressure to cease of activities.
For peace initiatives on TR-GR relations, it is dominantly the EU, and TR and GR
foreign ministries providing source of funds. Northwestern European countries support TRGR unofficial peace groups by providing expertise in the area. Turkey’s EU accession
necessitated EU Commission to encourage TR-GR NGOs to conduct joint programs and to
initiate a cross border cooperation programme.
For peace initiatives led by TCs and GCs, the UN, UK and US are leading actors in
providing financial aid. The UN provides funds through UNDP and UNOPS programs, the
UK through the UK High Commission and British foundations, and US through USAID,
American foundations and think-tanks, and Cyprus Fulbright Commission.
In the Armenian case, as observed there are less projects and activities run for the TRAR reconciliation when compared with TR-GR and TC-GC relations. The examples
examined for AR-TR ease of relations retain the common denominator of the support of ‘The
Track Two Program on Turkey and Caucasus’ of AU-CGP, which is financed by the US State
Department 70 .
The corporate social responsibility is still a peculiar concept for most of the profit
making companies in Turkey. Rare examples providing financial assistance for socially
70

When TARC was inaugurated, there have been many allegations that the US government financed its
activities. Phillips in his book notes that “[s]ome of TARC’s direct costs were indeed paid for out of the State
Department grant to American University. At no time, however were TARC members compensated” (2005: 65).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

132

contented projects are far from supporting projects for reconciliation and conflict resolution.
In the area of peacemaking and conflict resolution, it is business councils that directly fund
their business alliance programs. In addition, they support cultural and social activities
undertaken by civil society organisations.
Government relations and its approach
Depending upon change of the government, its attitude towards and expectation from
track two diplomacy changes. The Turkish Foreign Ministry follows activities of informal
peace initiatives either through their direct reporting or press statements made after important
events. In TR-GR relations, the biggest support was provided in the tenure of foreign
ministers Cem and Papandreou. After their finish of term, this support gradually decreased.
The Turkish government probably wary of establishing direct links to resolve conflicts with
Greece and particularly Armenia concerned of the possible negative attitude of the
constituencies leaves the space for track two activities to conduct their reconciliation work.
While Turkish government retains a positive approach either by declaring its support openly
or by not obstructing activities, it has its red marks. In other words, government interferes
track two activities where it sees fit. We can conclude by saying that government does not
impede initiatives that would possible provide positive atmosphere for reconciliation while it
tries to keep nationalist fractions opposing reconciliation and rapprochement under control.
Armenian government on the other hand does not show an opposing approach hence it
states that it has no ties with establishments and activities like TARC. It only mentions “it
gets informed about activities of nearly all non-governmental organizations” (cited from the
speech of the Armenian foreign ministry spokesperson in Phillips, 2005: 67). The government
is hesitant of openly supporting track two activities supposedly due to fear of Dashnaks’ harsh
criticism.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

133

Looking at Greek government’s position to track two diplomacy efforts, particularly
GTF, change of government after failure of G. Papandreou’s PASOK party was reflected on
GTF’s activities. As one of Forum members Üstün Ergüder states, GTF’s Greek members
were used to have close ties with the PASOK, currently there are some measures to include
new members from Karamanlis’s governing party. Ergüder adds that the current Turkish
government is highly supportive to GTF’s operations, highly depending upon former Foreign
Minister Yaşar Yakış’s proactive role (2005). We might consider GTF as another “track-oneand-half” setting due to the fact that it is backed and financed by both governments.
For the Cyprus case, it is hard to make a general comment on the relations between
unofficial interventions and both communities’ governments. As Fisher notes “unofficial
interventions have been characterized by a lack of continuity and/or connection to both the
decisionmaking level and official mediation efforts” (2001: 317). Niyazi Kızılyürek
comments that “civil society organizations in Greek Cypriot society act under the influence of
political parties and for this reason cannot be considered to be autonomous in the real sense of
the word” (2004: 53) and argues “[w]hile the most important problem that citizens’ initiatives
and civil societies in Southern Cyprus had to face was that these organized attempts would be
viewed with suspicion if they at all fell out of the control of the political parties, on the other
hand, the autonomous actions of civil groups in Northern Cyprus were seen as a threat to the
regime itself” (2004: 54). The current TC President Mehmet Ali Talat’s victory in December
2003 elections in north Cyprus was considered by many that the “result was the achievement
of the civil society” (Azgın, 2004: 61), since he was known with his pro-peace resolution and
pro-EU integration position. Prior to December 2003 elections, TC government was
considering track two initiatives as a threat to the nation, while following elections former TC
president Denktaş remained singled out in opposing unofficial peace attempts.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

134

When comparing Cyriot peace movement with TR, GR and AR peace efforts, one can
argue TC community uses the method of activism more effectively with protests and marches
on streets, campaigns supported by platforms of NGOs and making statements and demands
from local, regional and international leaders. On the other hand, GC peace community
prefers a low-profile approach; hence the peace movement is not as wide-spread and widely
supported in south Cyprus as it is in north.
Media relations and its reactions
News and articles reflected by the AR, GR and TC and GC media on informal
diplomacy activities seem to be highly critical when compared with media position in Turkey.
The ultra-nationalist wing of the Armenian Diaspora is proactive in influencing its community
by using the media—particularly the Internet—in an effective way. In particular cases, the
Armenian media uses its influential capacity to demand track two activities to come to an end.
In contrast the media in Turkey is highly indifferent to peace interventions that aim to ease
tension with Greece and Armenia. The nationalist-wing TC and GC media expose a similar
approach to Armenian media. The bi-communal groups and their activities have been
threatened many times by the TC and GC media calling them as “traitors” to their respective
nation.
All peace initiatives except business communities analysed in the thesis included
journalist members. Some peace diplomats who do not serve in the media business use their
close ties with influential journalists/ television program producers to disseminate their
message to the decision makers and to the masses.
Capacity building and proficiency in the field of conflict resolution
Interactive conflict resolution workshops’ progress and effectiveness highly depends
on the skills and proficiency of facilitators. In case of GTF, PRIO’s continuing attachment
and Dan Smith as its facilitator are some of the contributing elements of the success of Forum

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

135

activities. Although chairperson of TARC David L. Phillips states that he was “not trained in
Track Two diplomacy” (Phillips, 2005: 1) he has been actively involved in attempts to resolve
conflicts between Turks and Kurds, Turks and Greeks, and TCs and GCs prior to his TARC
experience. We observe the contradiction between northwestern European and American
styles in running forums, the prior holding a low-profile approach perceiving reconciliation as
a long-term process while the latter prefers a high-profile looking for quick-fixes—trying to
achieve positive results in a given short period of time.
With the start of the era of bi-communal activities initiated in Cyprus, there have been
many individuals trained on conflict resolution—an estimated number between 2.500-3.000.
For example there are conflict resolution trainers in many peace groups or people at decisionmaking levels who have been trained on this topic.
Business people active in peacemaking lack the skills and training in conflict analysis
and its resolution. They probably confide in their skills of negotiation and persuasion—skills
necessary in profit-making sector. Nevertheless competent interactive conflict resolution
scholar-practitioners facilitate their gatherings from time to time.
It is necessary for each peace group to build its capacity and gain skills on conflict
analysis and its resolution. Individuals involved should learn the necessary tools in
peacemaking, reconciliation and conflict transformation. WINPEACE exemplifies this issue
by having organised an internal conflict resolution workshop.
Rapprochement at societal level: ability to propose solutions at the social level
1996 Kardak/Imia crisis, 1999 Öcalan crisis and 1999 Marmara earthquakes have been
milestones in re-formation of the societal attitude towards the GR and TR “other”. The Greek
society was struck and puzzled to watch Turkish people on their televisions suffering from the
massive devastation of the Marmara earthquake. This atmosphere provided the mature
moment for civil diplomacy to take effect. Currently, there are many rapprochement activities

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

136

run by TR-GR organisations at various levels. The continuation of track two activities
implemented by private citizens is necessary for TR-GR relations not to fluctuate in times of
political and military crises.
A high number of TC-GC reconciliation activities are implemented at grassroots level,
probably due to the fact that Cypriot especially TC community has to encounter the effects of
the forty year conflict in their every day lives in the form of isolation, unrecognised status and
international embargo. In the Greek and Armenian cases, it is mainly the border regions
facing the difficulties of tensions with Turkey.
In the case of TR-AR relations, second track diplomacy activities are far from
reaching people at the grassroots level. People of border regions who are negatively affected
by the border opening should be proactive in running joint-peace activities with people on the
“other” side. Currently, it is the municipalities of border regions that establish alliances with
their counterparts in Turkey or Armenia. There needs to be massive social peace movements
in provinces affected by the border closure—Kars, Iğdır, Yerevan and Gyumri. Armenian
peace diplomats reminded their Turkish counterparts many times that there would not be any
smooth and healthy reconciliation process unless the issue of 1915 events are addressed. On
the other hand, a group of Turkish track two diplomats tend to leave the issue to be addressed
merely by politicians or historians. Therefore it is advised that private citizens running for
rapprochement activities engender alternative paths and tools to address this issue. Since
Armenian society cannot pass a smooth process of mourning, peace initiatives often are
weakened or impeded by the 1915 events.

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

137

Rapprochement at the political level: ability to propose solutions at the political level
Interactive problem-solving workshops are distinct from other peace initiatives in their
task to propose decision makers alternative solutions to ongoing conflict-based problems.
GTF appears to be accomplishing its task by having produced a series of reports forwarded to
governments. On the other hand, TARC was able to influence the Turkish government to ease
visa restrictions on Armenian citizens. The recommendations TARC made to both
governments at its closure can only be analysed in the future whether it had an affect on TR
and AR governments’ decisions. As seen in GTF example, there needs to be a long period
allocated before concrete results can be obtained by making recommendations to governing
bodies. TARC would have dedicated more time to reach an internal atmosphere dominated by
mutual trust and ongoing dialogue before passing recommendations to governments.
Alternative channels should continue to keep diplomatic relations between Turkey and
Armenia warm.
It is not only track-one-and-half bodies that propose alternative solutions to political
problems. All other peace initiatives outlined in the thesis have been very active in making
propositions to their governments, the EU, the UN and other countries’ governments.
Self-assessment
There are many articles, reports, books, and columns written on peace efforts outlined
in the thesis. Though a big proportion represent works of members or facilitators of these
forums. It is not very common to have track two activities evaluated by independent experts
and it is rare to make these reports public. Bi-communal training activities in Cyprus were
evaluated several times independently. It is obvious that there needs to be additional funding
to have the activities and effectiveness of peace forums independently evaluated.
On the other hand, it is a difficult task to make the impact assessment of peace
activities since the transformation takes a long time—maybe generations. When there is an

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

138

accomplishment at the end, the names and contributions of peace activists will hardly be
mentioned. In other words, the peace activists will keep on laying tiles patiently and
courageously on the path leading to peace, while political leaders will take their slow and
reluctant walk on that road. If there is success at the end of the road, political leaders will be
the victors not the peace activists. If there is failure at the end of the road, the believers in
peace will be accused of naivety or treason.

6. Conclusion
The thesis has concentrated on second track diplomacy bodies and activities working
for improved relations between Turks and Greeks, Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots and
Turks and Armenians. Before outlining the work of these non-state peace initiatives, the
theoretical framework of track two diplomacy had to be elucidated. The definition of the field
of track two diplomacy needed to be complemented with concepts of conflict analysis and its
resolution, role of NGOs in peacemaking and nonviolent action as a method of peacebuilding, interactive problem-solving approach as a method of track two diplomacy,
psychopolitical approaches in the field and the role of women in peace-building.
In order to make a thorough analysis of track two activities for the chosen conflicts,
each conflict case had to be explained with its unique historical facts causing the conflict pass
from one generation to the next, the needs, positions and interests of conflicting parties and
the official peace interventions that took place throughout history. For analysing track two
diplomacy efforts, three different cases of each conflict case have been highlighted. A number
of cases illustrated not only one body of a structured NGO but a number of convergent track
two activities. This fact is highly related with the nature of track two diplomacy activities to
be interdependent and interrelated, since different peace initiatives are directed towards one
main goal by using different tools and methods and liasing with different groups of people. In
order to have a balanced comprehension, each track two case was covered by describing its

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

139

overall aim, source of funds, alliances, human capacity, impediments, structure, activities,
methods, products and results, relations with the government and the media and effectiveness.
The research necessitated prudence to look at various other examples of informal
peace activities for two reasons: first to diagnose the place of the chosen track two cases in the
field, second to estimate how divergent and improved the peace activities are. At the end the
thesis tried to make an overall assessment using a number of criteria in order to determine
whether outlined cases represent relevance in unofficial diplomacy using the theoretical
framework as reference. In order to further the analysis, the overall assessment considered
making a comparison at two levels: first between track two activities working on the same
conflict, second between initiatives in the same structural setting—women led initiatives,
interactive problem-solving workshops and business oriented attempts—working on a
different conflict case.
Nevertheless the task of gathering information on peace initiatives is destined to be
limited to written and visual material and interviews conducted with peace activists. Unless
the researcher participates peace groups in their activities with an observer status or becomes
directly involved in these activities the research is restricted to information provided by third
party actors which will anyhow expose inadequateness. The restrictions of the research extend
to geographic and lingual factors as well. Without being able to make observations in
Armenia, Cyprus and Greece and meeting with peace initiators or their target groups and
without being able to understand literature written in Armenian and Greek languages the
research remains inadequate giving a comprehensive picture. Not to mention, the subject of
the thesis needs an uninterrupted attempt of gathering data and processing it since acting for
peace is an ongoing process as conflicts that surround us keep on growing and reshaping. As
these last lines are written, there are some people out there writing statements to their
governments and some groups actively organising cultural events for the summer term and

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

140

some people developing training programmes and peace curriculum for young people, like
there are probably some conflict entrepreneurs busy developing their plans to escalate crises
by instigating nationalist sentiments of masses and using their channels in the most effective
way.
As highlighted in Chapter 2, track two diplomacy has following characteristics and
functions: it complements official diplomacy, it opens up opportunities for communication, it
contributes to humanisation of the enemy, it builds capacity of the civil society, it establishes
public support and political will for peacemaking and long-term structural development. All
tracks in unofficial diplomacy have an indispensable role to play. The cultural activities for
peacemaking is not more or less important than interactive problem-solving workshops or
youth exchanges are not more or less result oriented than business oriented peace
interventions. Neither have former government officials active in second track diplomacy
have the privilege to underestimate the work conducted by private citizens. Each and every
one in this field has its share to play for advocating and working for peace at different stages
of reconciliation and conflict resolution. Since war is the outcome of a multi track effort,
peace as well needs concerted, integrated and interconnected efforts led by different types of
actors at different levels—top level, middle level and grassroots level. As Albert Schnabel
explains:
NGOs have a role to play on both sides: they educate the international community about their
responsibility towards the less fortunate of this world - and they generate and unite local efforts
in crisis-ridden countries and regions to strengthen long-term commitments to peacebuilding
efforts. Without the pivotal roles NGOs play in uniting local and international efforts to support
initiatives that bolster peace and counter violence, little will be achieved in the long run. If
anything, we must support those efforts and rest assured that whatever resources we invest in
preventive efforts, they will always reduce the likelihood of violent conflicts and their human,
political, cultural and economic consequences (2004).

As Brand-Jacobsen argues peace studies need to be brought “out of
theoretical/academic crevices” and its theory must be strengthened, deepened and
improved “by linking it with practice, need, and social/human responsibility” (2004).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

141

Another point to be emphasised is the need to have a gender perspective in the practice of
peace-building. While delving into the area of peace, reconciliation and conflict resolution
we must be able examine the role of gender and difference in genders in practicing
nonviolence and peacemaking as well as in situations of violence and conflict.
Those who actively participate in projects and activities envisioning peace by
transforming political, economic, cultural and social structures, need to be aware of the
burden of the past. Without addressing and reconciling the past events causing traumas
pass from one generation to the other, the status quo will not be changed no matter how
ambitious peace activists are. The past does not only contain codes of past traumas, it is
also home to elements like identity, culture and outside factors that are embedded in the
conflict. As Fisher notable expresses for Cyprus case that applies to all peace efforts, the
locked adversarial frame of relations can “only be altered through a comprehensive and
sustained unofficial track of conflict analysis and resolution that can overcome the trauma
of the past and address the basic needs of the parties” (2001: 307).

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

142

References
Abhaber, (2003), Discovering Common Grounds of Economic Cooperation: EP conference
Calls for Opening of the Turkish-Armenian Border, April 8, www.abhaber.com
Agayev, Zulfugar, (2004), “Azerbaijan: Turkey Could Prove Spoiler for Nagorno-Karabakh
Peace”, Eurasia Insight, April 8, www.eurasianet.org
Agos, (2002), Kadınlar Gününü Yerevan’da Kutlayan Türkiyeli Kadın Grubu ortak kitap ve
uluslararası toplantı projeleriyle ülkeye döndü (Women’s Group from Turkey has
returned to the country with joint book and international meeting projects after
celebrating Women’s Day in Yerevan), March 15
Akgün, Mensur, et al., (2005), “Quo vadis Cyprus?”, TESEV Working Paper, April,
www.tesev.org.tr
Akıncı, Uğur, (2002), “Turkey and Greece: Return to Sanity?”, Turkish Torque, May 2002,
www.turkishgreeksynergy.net
AKP, (2004), “Başbakan Erdoğan Atina’da Türk-Yunan Konseyi’nde Önemli Mesajlar
Verdi” (Prime Minister Erdoğan gave important messages at the Turkish-Greek
Council), Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi, May 7, www.akparti.org.tr
Akyol, Taha, (2004), “Sabiha Gökçen Tartışması” (The Sabiha Gökçen debate), Milliyet,
March 2
AMIDEAST, (2005), America-Mideast Educational and Training Services, Inc. web site,
www.amideast.org
Anastasiou, Harry, (2002), “Communication Across Conflict Lines: The Case of Ethnically
Divided Cyprus”, Journal of Peace Research, vol. 39, no. 5, p. 581-596
Anderson, Shelley, (1999), “Women’s Many Roles in Reconciliation”, in People Building
Peace: 35 Inspiring Stories from Around the World, Utrecht: European Centre for
Conflict Prevention
Anderson, Shelley, (2002a), “Which Half?”, Cross the Lines: Newsletter of the IFOR Women
Peacemakers Program, February
Anderson, Shelley, (2002b), “Women and Peacemaking: Lessons Learned from the Women
Peacemakers Program”, International Fellowship of Reconciliation, Patterns in
Reconciliation # 6
Arca Ajans, (2005), Kıbrıs sorununu, KKTC ve Güney Kıbrıs ticaret odaları çözecek...
(TRNC and South Cyprus Chambers of Commerce will solve the Cyprus problem…),
March 5, www.arcaajans.com

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

143

Armenia Diaspora Conference, (2001a), News Archive: July 2001 Events,
www.armeniadiaspora.com
Armenia Diaspora Conference, (2001b), News Archive: August 2001 Events,
www.armeniadiaspora.com
Armenian Weekly Online, (2003), Secretive Turkish-Armenian Panel Revived in Turkey, JulyAugust, www.hairenik.com/armenianweekly
Asmussen, Jan, (2004), “Cyprus after the Failure of the Annan-Plan”, European Centre for
Minority Issues, ECMI Brief # 11, July
Athens News Agency, (1996), Greek-Turkish Business Conference Opens in Athens,
December 10
Athens News Agency, (2003), Greek-Turkish Energy Forum cancelled, June 12
AU-CGP, (2005), American University, Centre for Global Peace web site,
www.american.edu/cgp
Aydıntaşbaş, Halis, (2004), “The Role of NGOs in Relations between the Two Countries and
Turkey-Greece Friendship Association”, in Taciser Ulaş Belge, ed., Voices for the
Future: Civic Dialogue Between Turks and Greeks, İstanbul: İstanbul Bilgi University
Press
Azar, Edward, (2002), “Protracted Social Conflicts and Second Track Diplomacy”, in John
Davies and Edy Kaufman, eds., Second Track / Citizens’ Diplomacy: Concepts and
Techniques for Conflict Transformation, Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield
Azgın, Fatma, (2004), “It is Civil Society That is Pushing for Peace in Cyprus”, in Taciser
Ulaş Belge, ed., Voices for the Future: Civic Dialogue Between Turks and Greeks,
İstanbul: İstanbul Bilgi University Press
BBC News, (2004), Timeline: Cyprus (A Chronology of Key Events), May 1,
http://news.bbc.co.uk
Benmayor, Gila, (2002), “Orada Bir Komşu Var Uzakta” (There is a neighbour over there far
from here), Hürriyet Pazar, Mart 17
Bercovitch, Jacob, (1997), “Mediation in International Conflict: An Overview of Theory, A
Review of Practice”, in I. William Zartman and J. Lewis Rasmussen, eds., Peacemaking
in International Conflict: Methods & Techniques, Washington, DC: United States
Institute of Peace Press
Brand-Jacobsen, Kai Frithjof, (2004), “Peace Studies, Peace Movements, Peace Praxis:
Contributions to a Dialogue and Working to Build Peace”, Transcend Bulletin – Peace
by Peaceful Means, November 21, www.transcend.org
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

144

Broome, Benjamin J., (2004), “Reaching Across the Dividing Line: Building a Collective
Vision for Peace in Cyprus”, Journal of Peace Research, vol. 41, no. 2, p. 191-209
Burton, John, (1990), Conflict: Resolution and Provention, London: Macmillan Press
CCCI, (2005), Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry web site, www.ccci.org.cy
CFD, (2003), Newsletter Gender and Peace-Building: UN Security Council Resolution,
Christlicher Friedensdienst on behalf of Copret/ Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation, 1/03
Chayes, Antonia Handler and Chayes, Abram (1998), “International Organisations and
Conflict Prevention Lessons from Business”, in Eugene Weiner ed., The Handbook of
Interethnic Coexistence, New York: Continuum
Christou, Jean, (1998), “Religious, Cultural Agreement Said Reached by G/C & T/C Business
Progress Hinges on Denktash Support”, Cyprus Mail, April 8
Christou, Jean, (2002), “Businessmen Seek to Bridge the Economic Divide”, Cyprus Mail,
January 22, www.hri.org
Cockburn, Cynthia, (2003), “Ethnic Partitition: A Gender Analysis Based on Cypriot
Women’s Perspectives”, Speech for Womanoeuvres, May, Zurich, www.cfdch.org/womanoeuvres
Cockburn, Cynthia, (2004), The Line: Women, Partition and the Gender Order in Cyprus,
London and New York: Zed Books
CSW, (2004), Forty-eighth Session: Women’s Equal Participation in Conflict Prevention,
Management and Conflict Resolution and in Post-Conflict Peace-Building; Agreed
Conclusions, Advance Unedited Version, 14 March
Current News, (2004a), “WINPEACE Karaburun Agro-Tourism Project hosts its first guests”,
European Commission’s Communication Project, October 4, Issue 50,
www.abinfoturk.net
Current News, (2004b), “WINPEACE demands ‘Peace Education’ be included in the
curriculum”, European Commission’s Communication Project, November 26, Issue 54,
www.abinfoturk.net
Current News, (2005), “Karaburun Women Agro-Tourism Project receives award from
TUREB”, European Commission’s Communication Project, March 2, Issue 63,
www.abinfoturk.net
Cyprus Action Network, (2003), “Call for Deepening of the Reconciliation Process”, Cypriots
for a Common Country, April 28, www.cyprusaction.org

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

145

Cyprus Alternative News, (2003a), Support from British MPs to the Turkish Cypriot and
Greek Cypriot Women, July 16, www.cyprusmedianet.com
Cyprus Alternative News, (2003b), “Cinderella Demonstration” from the Turkish and the
Greek Cypriot Women, July 9, www.cyprusmedianet.com
Cyprus Alternative News, (2004), Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot Women “Imagining a
Post-Solution Cyprus: The Gender Perspective”, March 24
Cyprus News Agency, (2002a), “Turkish Cypriot Chamber Says Milk Project Good Idea”,
May 7, www.cna.org.cy
Cyprus News Agency, (2002b), “Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot Chambers of Commerce
Discuss UN Plan”, November 21, www.hri.org
Danielyan, Emil, (2003), “Armenian Turkish Commission Continues to Push for
Rapprochement”, Caucasus Report by Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, June 13,
www.rferl.org
Danielyan, Emil, (2005), “Turkey ‘Nearly Opened Armenian Border In 2003’”, Armenia
Liberty, February 2, www.armenialiberty.org
Davies, John and Kaufman, Edy, (2002), “Second Track / Citizens’ Diplomacy: An
Overview”, in John Davies and Edy Kaufman, eds., Second Track / Citizens’
Diplomacy: Concepts and Techniques for Conflict Transformation, Oxford: Rowman &
Littlefield
Demetriou, Melina, (2000), “Gates Open for a New Start”, Cyprus Mail, August 30,
www.hri.org
Diamond, Louise and McDonald, John, (1996), Multi-Track Diplomacy: A Systems Approach
to Peace, third edition, Connecticut: Kumarian Press
Diamond, Louise, (1999), “Multi-Track Diplomacy in Cyprus: Planting Seeds”, in People
Building Peace: 35 Inspiring Stories from Around the World, Utrecht: European Centre
for Conflict Prevention
Doyle, Michael, (2003), “Armenia Activists Are Irked by Bush: He Fails to Call 1915
Killings by Ottoman Empire Genocide”, The Sacramento Bee, April 26,
http://www.artukraine.com/famineart/arm_gen.htm
Drakopoulos, Pavlos, (1997), “Greek, Turkish business leaders open avenues for
cooperation”, HERMES, February, www.byegm.gov.tr
Dünya, (2004), 18 yıl sonra Türk Başbakanı Yunanistan’da (Turkish Prime Minister is in
Greece after 18 years), May 7

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

146

Erdinç, Cengiz, (2005), Meseleyi Tarihçilere de Bırakmayı Başaramadık (We did not even
succeed to leave the subject to historians), Sabah, January 30
Ergüder, Üstün, (2005), Interview with the author, March 30
EU, (2004), “2004 Regular Report on Turkey’s Progress Towards Accession”, Commission of
the European Communities, Brussels, SEC(2004) 1201, October 6
EUBorderConf, (2004), “Chronology of Main Events: Greece/Turkey”, The European Union
and Border Conflicts, Newsletter, Number 7, June
Eurasia, (2005), Eurasia Cultural and Social Development Association web site,
www.avrasya-tr.org
European Centre for Conflict Prevention, (1999), People Building Peace: 35 Inspiring Stories
from Around the World, Utrecht: European Centre for Conflict Prevention
European Centre for Conflict Prevention, (2003), The Power of the Media: A Handbook for
Peacebuilders, Utrecht: European Centre for Conflict Prevention
Farah, Ahmed Yusuf, (2001), “Roots of Reconciliation in Somaliland”, in Luc Reychler and
Thania Paffenholz, eds., Peacebuilding: A Field Guide, Boulder and London: Lynne
Rienner Publishers
Fisher, Ronald J., (1999), “Social-Psychological Processes in Interactive Conflict Analysis
and Reconciliation”, in Ho-Won Jeong, ed., Conflict Resolution: Dynamics, Process
and Structure, Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing
Fisher, Ronald J., (2001), “Cyprus: The Failure of Mediation and the Escalation of an
Identity-Based Conflict to an Adversarial Impasse”, Journal of Peace Research, vol. 38,
no. 3, p. 307-326
Fisher, Ronald J., (2002), “Historical Mapping of the Field of Interactive Conflict
Resolution”, in John Davies and Edy Kaufman, eds., Second Track / Citizens’
Diplomacy: Concepts and Techniques for Conflict Transformation, Oxford: Rowman &
Littlefield
Fitzduff, Mari, (2001), “First and Second-Track Diplomacy in Northern Ireland”, in Luc
Reychler and Thania Paffenholz, eds., Peacebuilding: A Field Guide, Boulder and
London: Lynne Rienner Publishers
Frantz, Douglas, (2001), “Unofficial Commission Acts to Ease Turkish-Armenian Enmity”,
New York Times, July 10
Galtung, Johan, (1996), Peace by Peaceful Means: Peace and Conflict, Development and
Civilization, London: Sage Publications

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

147

Greece MFA, (2005), “Bilateral Relations: The Rapprochement Process”, Hellenic RepublicMinistry of Foreign Affairs, www.mfa.gr
Greece Now, (2004), Good Neighbours Make Good Investors, www.greece.gr
GTF, (1998), Press Release: November 1998, www.greekturkishforum.org
GTF, (1999a), Report Outlining the Suggested Confidence Building Measures and Crisis
Avoidance Measures Proposed by the CBMs Working Group, July,
www.greekturkishforum.org
GTF, (1999b), Press Release: September 1999, www.greekturkishforum.org
GTF, (1999c), Press Release: October 1999, www.greekturkishforum.org
GTF, (2000), Issues in the Aegean: Openings and Possibilities, June,
www.greekturkishforum.org
GTF, (2002a), Press Release: Announcement on the meeting of 12-14 April,
www.greekturkishforum.org
GTF, (2002b), Press Release: Announcement on the meeting of 27-28 June,
www.greekturkishforum.org
GTF, (2002c), Press Release: Statement on the meeting of 22-23 October,
www.greekturkishforum.org
Gurr, Ted Robert and Harff, Barbara, (1994), Ethnic Conflict in World Politics, Colorado and
Oxford: Westview Press
Gurr, Ted Robert and Davies, John, (2002), “Dynamics and Management of Ethnopolitical
Conflicts”, in John Davies and Edy Kaufman, eds., Second Track / Citizens’ Diplomacy:
Concepts and Techniques for Conflict Transformation, Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield
Gültekin, Burcu, (2002), The Stakes of the Opening of the Turkish-Armenian Border: The
Cross-Border Contacts Between Armenia and Turkey, originally published by the
French Institute of Anatolian Studies-Research Program on Turkey-Caucasus, İstanbul:
Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council
Gültekin, Burcu, (2004), “The Missing South Eastern Pillar for Unifying the European
Continent”, Turkish-Armenian Business Development Council, November 17
HAD, (2002), Letter to Annan, October 2, www.tech4peace.org
HAD, (2003), Cyprus EU Accession and Turkish Language, April 1, www.cyprusaction.org
Havermans, Jos, (1999), “Private Professionals for Peace”, in People Building Peace: 35
Inspiring Stories from Around the World, Utrecht: European Centre for Conflict
Prevention

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

148

HCI, (2003), “Greek-Turkish Energy Conference”, Hellenic Centre for Investment Newsletter,
May, www.elke.gr
Hunt, Swaenee and Posa, Cristina,(2001), “Barış Mücadelesi Veren Kadınlar”, Foreign Policy
Türkiye Baskısı, May-June, p. 32-41
Hürriyet, (2000), Krizin Nedeni İki Ülkenin Savunma Bakanları (The source of the crisis is
two countries’ defense ministers), November 2
Hürriyet, (2001), Türk ve Yunan Kadınlardan Kalıcı Silah İndirimi Çağrısı (Turkish and
Greek women’s call for arms reduction), April 23
Hürriyet, (2002), Yabancılar Dönüyor (Foreigners are coming back), March 5
ICTJ, (2005), International Center for Transitional Justice web site, www.ictj.org
IMTD, (2001), 2001 Annual Report, Arlington: Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy
IMTD, (2003), 2002-2003 Annual Report, Arlington: Institute for Multi-Track Diplomacy
Kalantarian, Karine, (2005), “Dashnaks Offered ‘Dialogue’ With Turkey”, Radio Free
Europe/ Radio Liberty, February 14
Kathimerini, (2004), Greece, Turkey look to the future: Karamanlis and Erdogan, in friendly
talks, stress commitment to improvement in relations, May 8
Kavan, Jan (2003), Opening address at “Meeting on the Role of Civil Society in Conflict
Prevention”, 57th Session of the UN General Assembly, September 4
Kelman, Herbert C., (1997), “Social-Psychological Dimensions of International Conflict”, in
I. William Zartman and J. Lewis Rasmussen, eds., Peacemaking in International
Conflict: Methods & Techniques, Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace
Press
Kelman, Herbert C., (1998), “Informal Mediation by the Scholar/Practitioner”, in Eugene
Weiner ed., The Handbook of Interethnic Coexistence, New York: Continuum
Kelman, Herbert C., (2002), “Interactive Problem Solving as a Tool for Second Track
Diplomacy”, in John Davies and Edy Kaufman, eds., Second Track / Citizens’
Diplomacy: Concepts and Techniques for Conflict Transformation, Oxford: Rowman &
Littlefield
Kentel, Ferhat and Poghosyan, Gevorg, (2005), “Armenian and Turkish Citizens’ Mutual
Perceptions and Dialogue Project”, Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation,
and Sociological and Marketing Research Center, Yerevan and Istanbul,
www.tesev.org.tr
Kıbrıs, (2002), Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot Businessmen Met Yesterday at Ledra
Palace Hotel, February 20
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

149

Kızılyürek, Niyazi, (2004), “On Civil Society and Non-Governmental Organisations in
Cyprus”, in Taciser Ulaş Belge, ed., Voices for the Future: Civic Dialogue Between
Turks and Greeks, İstanbul: İstanbul Bilgi University Press
Kirişçi, Kemal and Çarkoğlu, Ali, (2004), “Civil Society, Public Opinion and Foreign Policy:
Greek-Turkish Relations”, in Taciser Ulaş Belge, ed., Voices for the Future: Civic
Dialogue Between Turks and Greeks, İstanbul: İstanbul Bilgi University Press
Kitsantonis, Niki (2003), “Women push for peace: Greek-Turkish drive promotes youth
education and female empowerment”, Kathimerini English Edition, October 30
Kotchikian, Asbed, (2005), “Border Politics: The Geopolitical Implications of Opening the
Turkish-Armenian Border”, paper prepared for the Third International AIPRG
Conference on Armenia, World Bank, Washington, D.C., January 15-16
Kömürcü, Güler, (2003), “Ve... Ermenistan kapısı havada açıldı” (And… the border with
Armenia opened in the air), Akşam Gazetesi, October 16
Kriesberg, Louis, (1996), “Varieties of Mediating Activities and Mediators in International
Relations”, in Jacob Bercovitch, ed., Resolving International Conflicts: The Theory and
Practice of Mediation, Boulder and London: Lynne Rienner Publishers
Kriesberg, Louis, (1997), “The Development of the Conflict Resolution Field”, in I. William
Zartman and J. Lewis Rasmussen, eds., Peacemaking in International Conflict: Methods
& Techniques, Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press
Kriesberg, Louis, (1998a), “Coexistence and the Reconciliation of Communal Conflicts”, in
Eugene Weiner ed., The Handbook of Interethnic Coexistence, New York: Continuum
Kriesberg, Louis, (1998b), “Intractable Conflicts”, in Eugene Weiner ed., The Handbook of
Interethnic Coexistence, New York: Continuum
Lederach, John Paul, (1999), “Justpeace”, in People Building Peace: 35 Inspiring Stories
from Around the World, Utrecht: European Centre for Conflict Prevention
Lederach, John Paul, (2001), “Levels of Leadership”, in Luc Reychler and Thania Paffenholz,
eds., Peacebuilding: A Field Guide, Boulder and London: Lynne Rienner Publishers
Lumsden, Malvern, (1999), “Breaking the Cycle of Violence: Three Zones of Social
Reconstruction”, in Ho-Won Jeong, ed., Conflict Resolution: Dynamics, Process and
Structure, Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing
Markarian, Atom, (2004), “Transport Minister Hopes For Open Border With Turkey”,
Armenia Liberty, February 6, www.armenialiberty.org
Marshall, Monty G. and Gurr, Ted Robert, eds., (2003), Peace and Conflict 2003: A Global
Survey of Armed Conflicts, Self-Determination Movements, and Democracy, College
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

150

Park, MD: Center for International Development and Conflict Management, University
of Maryland
McDonald, John W., (2003), “The Impact of NGO’s on Policy Makers”, The Institute of
Multi-Track Diplomacy, Occasional Paper Number 11, December, www.imtd.org
McDonald, John, (2004), “Presentation D: The Impact of NGOs on Policy Makers”, Fourth
E-Symposium on Conflict Prevention on the Role of NGOs and Other Non-State Actors
in Conflict Prevention, Japan Center for Conflict Prevention, www.dwcw.org/4th_esymposium
Millas, Hercules, (2000), Speech at the panel discussion on “Turkey-Greece Relations:
Escaping From Security Dilemma in Aegean” organised by the Foreign Ministry
Strategic Researches Center, Ankara, December 7
Milliyet, (2003), ‘1915’ Tartışılacak (‘1915’ will be discussed), December 11
Mitchell, Christopher and Banks, Michael, (1996), Handbook of Conflict Resolution: The
Analytical Problem-Solving Approach, London: Pinter
Mkrtchyan, Gayane, (2005), “Seeking Relations: Turkish Business Leader Calls for an Open
Border with Armenia”, Armenia Now, February, www.armenianow.com
Moberg, Jonas, (2004), “Presentation E: The Role of the Private Sector in Conflict
Prevention”, Fourth E-Symposium on Conflict Prevention on the Role of NGOs and
Other Non-State Actors in Conflict Prevention, Japan Center for Conflict Prevention,
www.dwcw.org/4th_e-symposium
Natsios, Andrew S., (1997), “An NGO Perspective”, in I. William Zartman and J. Lewis
Rasmussen, eds., Peacemaking in International Conflict: Methods & Techniques,
Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press
North Civil Initiative, (2005), Letter to Annan, January 7, www.ktto.net
Noyan Tapan, (2003), “In Istanbul TARC discusses possibilities of Boosting of Contacts
Between Two Representatives of Community”, Noyan Tapan News Agency, June 9,
www.nt.am
Odabaşı, Harun (1999), “Düşman kardeşler barışa mecbur” (Peace is a must for adversary
siblings), Aksiyon, July
Oral, Zeynep, (2004a), Interview with the author, March 15
Oral, Zeynep, (2004b), “A Practice for Developing Relations between Turkey and Greece:
WINPEACE”, in Taciser Ulaş Belge, ed., Voices for the Future: Civic Dialogue
Between Turks and Greeks, İstanbul: İstanbul Bilgi University Press
Özalp, Güven, (1997), “Cem’den Azerbeycan’ı İkna Turu”, Milliyet, August 16
Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

151

Özel, Soli, (2004), “Rapprochement on Non-Governmental Level: The story of Turkish-Greek
Forum”, in Mustafa Aydın and Kostas Ifantis, eds., Turkish-Greek Relations: The
Security Dilemma in the Aegean, London: Routledge
Paffenholz, Thania, (2001), “Western Approaches to Negotiation and Mediation: An
Overview”, in Luc Reychler and Thania Paffenholz, eds., Peacebuilding: A Field
Guide, Boulder and London: Lynne Rienner Publishers
Peuch, Jean-Christophe, (2003), “Armenia/Turkey: Economic Necessity Pushing Yerevan,
Ankara Closer”, Eurasia Insight, July 26, www.eurasianet.org
Phillips, David L., (2005), Unsilencing the Past: Track Two Diplomacy and TurkishArmenian Reconciliation, New York: Berghahn Books
Poyraz Doğan, Yonca, (2002a), “Costas Carras: Greek and Turkey do share the same
understanding about the region and the world around us”, Turkish Greek Synergy, May,
www.turkishgreeksynergy.net
Poyraz Doğan, Yonca, (2002b), “Ilker Turkmen: We concentrate on the common interests for
both Greece and Turkey. That's our secret.”, Turkish Greek Synergy, May,
www.turkishgreeksynergy.net
PRIO, (2005), International Peace Research Institute of Oslo web site, www.prio.no
Proteou, Pavlina, (2003), “The Goals for Greek-Turkish Business Co-Operation: Interview
with the President of the Turkish-Greek Business Council Şarık Tara”, Athens Chamber
of Commerce and Industry, April 21, www.acci.gr
Rasmussen, J. Lewis, (1997), “Peacemaking in the Twenty-First Century”, in I. William
Zartman and J. Lewis Rasmussen, eds., Peacemaking in International Conflict: Methods
& Techniques, Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press
Rumelili, Bahar, (2004a), “The European Union’s Impact on the Greek-Turkish Conflict: A
Review of the Literature”, Working Paper Series in EU Border Conflicts Studies, No.6,
January, University of Birmingham
Rumelili, B. (2004b), “The Talkers and the Silent Ones: The EU and Change in GreekTurkish Relations”, Working Paper Series in EU Border Conflicts Studies, No.10,
October, University of Birmingham
Sassounian, Harut, (2005), “TARC Moderator’s Book Reveals Anti-Armenian Intent”, The
California Courier, February 10
Schnabel, Albert, (2004), “Comment D: The Need to Build a Conflict Prevention
Community”, Fourth E-Symposium on Conflict Prevention on the Role of NGOs and

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

152

Other Non-State Actors in Conflict Prevention, Japan Center for Conflict Prevention,
www.dwcw.org/4th_e-symposium
Sertel, Jennifer Mansur and Kurt, Güliz, (2004), WINPEACE Barış Eğitimi: Barış Bireyde
Başlar (WINPEACE Peace Education: Peace Starts Within), WINPEACE
Shonholtz, Raymond, (1998), “Conflict Resolution Moves East: How the Emerging
Democracies of Central and Eastern Europe Are Facing Interethnic Conflict”, in Eugene
Weiner ed., The Handbook of Interethnic Coexistence, New York: Continuum
Simmons, P.J., (1998), “Learning to Live with NGOs”, Foreign Policy, Fall, Number 112, p.
82-96
Soyak, Noyan, (2004), Interview with the author, March 4
Sözen, Ahmet, (2004), “The Cyprus Negotiations: From the 1963 Inter-communal
Negotiations to the Annan Plan”, Sixth Global Leadership Forum, Istanbul, June 24-27
STGP, (2005), Civil Society Development Program web site, www.stgp.org
Strimling, Andrea L., (2002), “Building Capacity for Justpeace: Design, Implementation and
Evaluation of Training Programs”, in John Davies and Edy Kaufman, eds., Second
Track / Citizens’ Diplomacy: Concepts and Techniques for Conflict Transformation,
Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield
TABDC, (2005), “Activity Report 1997-Present”, Turkish-Armenian Business Development
Council, www.tabdc.org
TARC, (2001), Terms of Reference: Turkish Armenian Reconciliation Commission, July 9,
www.tarc.info
TARC, (2003), Legal Analysis of the Applicability of the United Nations Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide to Events Which Occurred During
the Early Twentieth Century, Trilingual Edition, February, www.tarc.info
TARC, (2004), Meeting Report: Moscow, April 12-14, 2004, www.tarc.info
TAYWG, (2002), Turkish Armenian Young Women’s Group web site, www.taywg-tr.org
TCC, (2002), Teaching materials of the on-line course on “Transforming Civil Conflicts” by
the European Network University, www.netuni.nl
TCCC, (2002a), 16 January 2002 Athens, Declaration of the Economic forum for the island
of Cyprus, www.ktto.net
TCCC, (2002b), Press Release: A Call From the Economic Organizations to the Leaders,
Saray Hotel, February 27, www.ktto.net

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

153

TCCC, (2002c), Kıbrıs Türk Ticaret Odası Rum Ticaret ve Sanayi Odası İle Görüştü (Turkish
Cypriot Chamber of Commerce met with the Greek Chamber of Commerce and
Industry), October 2002, www.ktto.net
TCCC, (2002d), Kıbrıs Türk Ticaret Odası ile Kıbrıs Rum Ticaret ve Sanayi Odası Annan'ın
"Çözüm Planı"nı Değerlendirdi (Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce and Greek
Cypriot Chamber of Commerce Industry evaluated Annan’s “Solution Plan”),
November 21, www.ktto.net
TCCC, (2004), Joint Declaration Of The Cyprus Chamber Of Commerce And Industry And
The Turkish Cypriot Chamber Of Commerce, March 15, www.ktto.net
TCCC, (2005a), Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce web site, www.ktto.net
TCCC, (2005b), Yeşil Hat Ticaretini Geliştirebilmek için iki Oda Beraber Çalışmaya Başladı
(Two Chambers of Commerce started working together for improving the Green Line
trade), April 12, www.ktto.net
TDN, (1999), “Turkish-Greek Business Council cancels all joint activities”, Turkish Daily
News, February 25
TDN, (2004), “Why Turks and Armenians Must Eventually Shake Hands”, Turkish Daily
News, May 25
TFP, (2005), “Hands Across the Divide”, Technology for Peace, www.tech4peace.org
The White House, (1999), Remarks by President Clinton and President Demirel at Luncheon
Meeting of the Turkish Business Council, November 16, Istanbul,
http://clinton4.nara.gov
Tınç, Ferai (1999), “Kokularını Sürüp Kutlamaya Gittiler” (They scented with perfume and
went for celebration), Hürriyet, December 19
Turan, İlter, (2004), Interview with the author, March 11
TurGreSoc, (2005), Turkish-Greek Student Society web site, www.turgresoc.org
Turkish Embassy, (2005), “Regions and Certain Countries: Greece”, Embassy of the Republic
of Turkey, Washington, DC., www.turkishembassy.org
Turkish Press Review, (1998), Businessmen Discuss Cyprus Cooperation, December 14,
www.byegm.gov.tr
Türk, Eylem, (1999), “İşadamları da barışıyor” (Businessmen reconcile as well), Milliyet,
August 29
UNSC, (2000), Resolution 1325 (2000) Adopted by the Security Council at its 4213th Meeting,
on 31 October 2000

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

154

UNSC, (2003), “Report of the Secretary-General on his mission of good offices in Cyprus”,
United Nations Security Council, April 1
Van Eck, Jan, (2001), “Multitrack Efforts in Burundi”, in Luc Reychler and Thania
Paffenholz, eds., Peacebuilding: A Field Guide, Boulder and London: Lynne Rienner
Publishers
Van Tongeren, Paul, (1999), “Inspiring Stories of Peace-Building”, in People Building Peace:
35 Inspiring Stories from Around the World, Utrecht: European Centre for Conflict
Prevention
Volkan, Vamık, (1997), Bloodlines: From Ethnic Pride to Ethnic Terrorism, New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux
Volkan, Vamık, (1998), “The Tree Model: Psychopolitical Dialogues and the Promotion of
Coexistence”, in Eugene Weiner ed., The Handbook of Interethnic Coexistence, New
York: Continuum
WINPEACE, (2005), WINPEACE web site, www.geocities.com/win_peace
WM, (2004), “Women Working Together”, Turkish & Armenian Women’s Magazine, Issue 1,
July-October
Wolleh, Oliver, (2001), Citizens’ Rapprochement by the Local Peace Constituencies: BiCommunal Conflict Resolution Trainer Group in Cyprus, Berlin: Berghof Research
Center for Constructive Conflict Management
Yenidüzen, (2003), 1 Mayıs 2004’ten Önce Çözüm Konusunda Hemfikir! (Agreed for
resolution before 1 May 2004!), June 20, www.cypriot.org.uk
Yılmaz, Serpil, (2002), “Ermenistan, Kadınlar, Dostluk” (Armenia, Women, Friendship),
Milliyet, March 10
Zaman, (2001), Erivan’dan Komisyona Destek (Yerevan supports commission), September 9
Zartman, William I., (1997), “Toward the Resolution of International Conflicts”, in I. William
Zartman and J. Lewis Rasmussen, eds., Peacemaking in International Conflict: Methods
& Techniques, Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press

Burcu Yeşiladalı - June 2005

155

