Multiparty Mediation in Cyprus in 1963–1965
JOANA AMARAL
Abstract
A consensus of opinion has emerged in mediation literature which places multiparty mediation as
the ‘key’ to successful mediation. In principle, multiparty mediation combines facilitation
strategies as practiced by neutral actors, with the more directive and intrusive strategies played by
powerful States capable of exerting pressure on local stakeholders reluctant to reach a peace
settlement. This article aims to demonstrate that the mediation initiatives conducted in Cyprus in
1963–1965 by the United States of America and the United Nations had an ideal multiparty
potential that was not recognised and was, indeed, rebuffed by these actors. In conclusion, this
study infers that multiparty mediation might have substantially benefited the peace process had
the United States of America united its capacity to leverage all parties to align with the United
Nations’ willingness to facilitate a settlement locally.
Keywords: conflict, mediation, multiparty mediation, Cyprus, Greece, Turkey, United States of America
(USA), United Nations (UN)

Introduction
The intensity and multiplication of intrastate conflictuality in the post-Cold War era called for a
growing involvement of the international community in peacekeeping and peacemaking
operations. Gradually, mediation processes were applied to managing and resolving these conflicts.
They multiplied and diversified, and mediation grew to become an ever-more sophisticated and
increasingly important instrument of peacemaking. However, the effectiveness of mediation
initiatives in generating agreements in the complex and intractable intrastate conflict contexts has
been low. As a consequence, in the debate on how mediation might better serve a peace process,
the consensus regarding the ‘key’ to successful mediation outcomes pointed to exercising a
combination of mediation strategies to be initiated by differently resourced mediators. Multiparty
mediation supporters therefore realised that complex conflict situations required complex
responses which necessitated the involvement of a multiplicity of mediators (Croker et al., 1999;
Beardsley et al., 2006; Bercovitch and Gartner, 2009).
Intrastate conflicts are particularly difficult to settle and tend to become prolonged over time
(Azar, 1990, pp. 7–16). The Cyprus conflict is played out on different levels which add to the conflict’s
intractability and self-perpetuating dynamics. At the local level, the Cypriot conflict is characterised
by power, state resources access and the demographic asymmetries between a Greek Cypriot majority

73

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)

and a Turkish Cypriot minority. Ethnicity has provided the polarising and segregating dividing line
and fuelled conflict escalation, ethnic cleansing and total physical separation between the two
communities. At the regional level, Greece and Turkey’s historically difficult relations and deep
mistrust have spilled over to the local level. The ‘motherlands’, being stakeholders in the Cyprus
dispute, have vested strategic interests on the island, legitimised by their connection to the local
communities. As a result, during the first mediation initiatives enacted in Cyprus between 1963 and
1965 by the United States of America (USA) and the United Nations (UN), both disputants
viewed conflict and the mediation initiatives as a zero-sum game and equally searched for, and
counted on, external sympathies and allies to achieve their antithetical interests and aims (UN
Secretary General, 2003, para. 143): the Greek Cypriot aspiration for union with Greece or enosis and
the Turkish Cypriot reactive taksim, or partition of the island’s territory between Turkey and Greece.
In 1963, the USA took the initiative to mediate the Cyprus conflict due to political and
strategic interests. In the Cold War milieu, the USA feared that the conflict would not only spill
over to the regional level and generate a Greek–Turkish war that might result in a weakened North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), but that American influence might also be lost to the
Soviets in the southern Mediterranean. When powerful states mediate, mediation can be analysed
as an extension of the state’s foreign policy. In such cases, the process of a power mediation as
opposed to a pure mediation, is led by these states and leverage is applied by way of benefit promises
or threats of punishment to push for compromise on a settlement. The aim is to guide the parties
and the mediation process in order to locate a solution in line with the interests of the powerful
state (Güney, 2004, p. 28). To protect its interests and pursue its goals, the USA, being both
resourceful and powerful, performed mediation in Cyprus in a directive1 style, providing incentives
and issuing ultimatums to affect the parties’ conflicting issue-framing and to coerce them into
agreeing to its proposed settlements.
The UN, on the other hand, became involved in the Cyprus dispute in response to the Greek
Cypriot call for its involvement. Being a neutral mediator, the UN performed mainly facilitative2

1

2

Directive strategies are the most intrusive and powerful form of mediation by which the mediator affects the
content and substance of the mediation process. A directive mediator aims at changing the parties’ behaviour and
motivation by providing incentives or issuing ultimatums that alter the way in which they frame conflicting issues
with the underlying objective of inciting the parties to cooperate. To affect the parties’ perspectives on the
mediation process, their expectations or their issue-framing, a directive mediator must possess power and resources
to successfully perform certain tactics such as increasing non-agreement costs, taking responsibility for concessions,
rewarding party concessions, promising resources or threatening their withdrawal, or offering to observe agreement
compliance (Bercovitch and Lee, 2001).
Facilitative mediation is defined as ‘a set of techniques that help actors correctly identify agreements within the
overlapping range of possible nonviolent outcomes’, whereas the mediator serves not only as a communication
channel, but also as an information provider who clarifies misconceptions the parties have over their opponent
(Beardsley et al., 2006, pp. 62–66).

74

MULTIPARTY MEDIATION IN CYPRUS IN 1963–1965

and formulative3 style mediation through official mediation or good offices. While UN mediation
is advantageous for the parties in conflict because its involvement, as dictated by the UN Charter,
holds no other interest than maintaining peace and security (Richmond, 1998b, p. 26) it has less
control over the mediation process, whose existence and progress relies greatly on the parties’ cooperation.
In mediation literature, while muscled mediators, such as powerful States, are believed to be
better equipped to pressure conflict disputants with highly adversarial relationships into preferring
to solve their differences through negotiations rather than continuing to fight, neutral mediators,
such as International Organisations, are viewed to be more effective in solving the parties’
commitment problems and generating trust in times of de-escalation. This article aims to
demonstrate that as mediators, the USA and the UN have different resources, bargaining and
legitimacy capabilities in the Cyprus peace process which might have been capitalised on through
a multiparty mediation process. To this end, an analysis is made of the Cyprus mediators, which
incorporates UN and USA mediation performances since the involvement of the USA in 1963
and the end of UN official mediation led by Galo Plaza in 1965. After a theoretical
contextualisation, the referred mediation initiatives are evaluated covering the following
parameters: the mediator/s and its/their interests; the parties’ position at the beginning of the
mediation process; the mediators’ proposed solutions and their views and preferences in relation to
the solutions to the conflict; and, finally, the result of the mediation initiative. This analysis aims to
discuss how a multiparty approach could have benefitted the process and outcomes of the
mediation initiatives under consideration. The findings of this study offer support to the
multiparty mediation literature and aspire to contribute to an awareness of the vital importance of
coordination between the USA and UN peacemaking initiatives in conflict settings elsewhere.

Power, Pure and Multiparty Mediation
The debate on how, when or who should mediate and to what purpose, has been evolving
continuously in mediation literature in response to the complex and intractable intrastate conflict
situations in which it has been steadily practiced. When there is intervention, the mediator
changes the conflict’s context by introducing new information or by providing incentives or
sanctions which convince the parties that mediation is a preferable alternative to continued
fighting and that cooperation is possible. In principle, the greater the change needed for this game
transformation to occur the more resourced a mediator must be (Terris and Maoz, 2005, p. 571).
But, whether a mediator should use incentives or punishments to generate cooperation between
3

Formulative mediators are proposition creators and makers as well as mediation environment controllers, acting
as ‘coordinators’ who structure the negotiations, create temporal constraints, redefine issues and create focal points
and/or propose alternatives, especially when an impasse is reached at the negotiations’ table (Beardsley et al., 2006,
pp. 62–66).

75

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)

parties in a mediation process is not consensual in mediation literature. Whereas supporters of
pure mediation consider that a mediator only assists the parties in conflict in finding an agreement
(Fisher and Keashley, 1991, p. 3), supporters of muscled or power mediation stress that a mediator’s
capacity to influence the parties’ interests can be crucial to generate the necessary compromises for
a final settlement to be agreed (Bercovitch and Lee, 2001).
Historically, states have been the primary mediators since the rise of the nation-state rendered
it the only legitimate actor in the international system. Until the emergence of non-state actors at
the end of World War II, powerful states and coalitions guided by the realpolitik of interstate
relations dominated the third party intervention scene (Frazier and Dixon, 2009, p. 46). Savun
(2009, p. 99) argues that the states which are most likely to mediate conflict are those that possess a
strong intelligence gathering apparatus, diplomatic representation in the territory of a state involved
in the conflict, or alliance ties with it. What this implies is that, typically, there is a pre-existing
strategic, diplomatic or historical connection between the mediation-offering state and the
disputants, so that a state becomes involved in mediation when the conflict’s management is relevant
to its interests. Although a state’s intervention as mediator is legitimised by a proclaimed conflict
management objective, underlying the desire for peace, a state’s motivation for becoming involved in
the conflict stems from self-interest and power politics (Zartman and Touval, 1996, p. 446).
In the twentieth century, international organisations (IOs) have developed as crucial peaceful
interaction framework providers between the diversified typology of actors that have emerged in
the modern, globalised, international system. Because IOs are a product of a centralised
cooperation among states, they are seen as legitimate information collectors that reduce
uncertainty in the international system and, thus, continue to facilitate and foster cooperation
among actors (Savun, 2009, pp. 100–101). For this reason, IOs have become active participants in
peacemaking and conflict management activities, particularly the UN when freed from the
bipolar constraints of the Cold War period.
Nonetheless, when the UN mediates a conflict, the disputants tend to have greater control
over the process (than when mediation is performed by a state) because its coercive capacity is
lower and, hence, the initiation of mediation is much more dependent on the disputants’ interest
in being mediated by the UN (Richmond, 1998b, p. 10). Although the UN is not dispossessed of
leverage, its capacity to influence conflict parties stems, not from its military capacity and its
relative power position in the international system as it does for states, but from its international
status and reputation. Furthermore, international organisations mediate with the sole purpose of
ending the conflict. As a result, they deposit a greater interest than states in the conflicts’ solution
(ibid.). In sum, they possess a lower capacity to leverage the parties but are more committed than
states to solving the conflict. Hence, mediation by IOs, relies far more on the parties’ will to
maintain a cooperative behaviour, whereas a state, understood as a more resourced and powerful
mediator, tends to exert additional control over the parties due to their interest in resources which
the state may offer through the course of mediation (Smith, 1994, p. 447).

76

MULTIPARTY MEDIATION IN CYPRUS IN 1963–1965

The question presented at the centre of the debate between supporters of power and pure
mediation is whether a given actor must be impartial to perform mediation or not and whether or
not the ‘triangular relationship’ in a mediation process is broken when a mediator uses ‘carrots and
sticks’ to pressure the parties to cooperate or to accept a given settlement (Zartman and Touval,
1996, p. 454). Advocates of mediation as a less intrusive exercise consider that when mediators
apply intrusive strategies to leverage the parties, they become partial and lose their neutrality,
ceasing to be a mediator and becoming a third party to the conflict (ibid.). On the other hand,
power mediation advocates argue that impartiality is unimportant to parties who wish to be
mediated and, therefore it is not a necessary precondition for mediation exercises (Bercovitch and
Lee, 2001). They also consider that mediators are always interested actors who feel propelled to
mediate to serve an interest and follow their conflict outcome preference. Even if the interest is in
generating peace, neutrality is never fully practiced or felt by mediators (Richmond, 1998a, p. 717).
Put simply, to be a mediator, if impartiality or neutrality are not required of an actor, then
mediation has a wider spectrum of activity and may, therefore, be both pure and muscled.
It has been said that States have more capacity to leverage but are seen as less neutral or biased
mediators, while IOs have a lower capacity to leverage but are seen as more neutral. Because of their
different resource capabilities it is expected that higher involvement mediation strategies will more
typically be performed by states, while IOs pursue less intrusive strategies which do not require the
capacity to leverage and are not as prone to damage their neutrality. Conversely, the intrusive
directive strategies performed by states are not capable of addressing the parties’ more fundamental
relationship-related problems and often generate short-term solutions that lead to the conflicts’ reescalation once the mediator exits the conflict’s environment (Haxia, 2007, p. 593). In contrast, the
less intrusive non-directive strategies performed by IOs have the capacity to reduce
misconceptions and mistrust between the parties and to engender a more cooperative relationship
in the long-term, despite being less effective in generating final settlements. Quinn et al. (2009, p.
194), find that even though facilitative and formulative mediation are less able to induce
compromise between the parties as effectively as directive mediation, they are more successful in
reducing tensions in the long-term and in generating commitment to what has been agreed.
In identity conflicts where discrimination, victimisation and social hatred exist, disputants are
highly antagonised and unwilling to make meaningful concessions towards a demonised ‘other’
(Fisher, 2001, pp. 308, 321–323). Since disputants in these conflicts have highly adversarial
relationships and zero-sum perceptions of the mediation process, their expectations regarding the
mediation result becomes more sensitive, especially in the case of endurable and protracted
conflicts (Croker et al., 1999, pp. 40–41; Haxia, 2007, p. 593). In the literature, the comparative
analysis on the short- and long-term effects of mediation strategies to address the complexity and
intractability of intrastate conflict has led to support for one effective form which allows for a
capitalisation of the advantages offered by the different mediation strategies and actors. Multiparty
mediation is defined by Croker et al. (1999, p. 9), as ‘attempts by many third parties to assist peace

77

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)

negotiations in any given conflict’, which may occur sequentially, one mediator at a time over the
life of the conflict, or simultaneously, many different mediators at the same time performed by
various actors such as intergovernmental organisations and national governments.
Most importantly, supporters of multiparty mediation affirm that for this potential for
complementarity between the various existing mediation strategies to be fully realised, the
coordinated and sequenced action between pure and power mediators, or states and international
organisations, is crucial (Carment et al., 2009, p. 233). Directive mediators can be useful interveners
to multiparty mediation supporters when conflict tension escalates and a threat or a display of the
use of force exists which render the parties unwilling to negotiate. By using leverage to prevent
escalation and to pressure the parties into returning to the negotiating table, facilitative and
formulative mediators can work with the parties on the improvement of their relationship and the
development of trust (Frazier and Dixon, 2009, pp. 58–59). On the other hand, directive strategies
are unlikely to work when the conflicts’ intensity is low because they may well damage the deescalated environment if parties find the mediator to be conducive and self-interested. Likewise, if
the mediators’ intentions or the fairness of an agreement is suspect, then disputants may refuse to
negotiate or agree (Bercovitch and Gartner, 2009, p. 28).
Therefore, when conflict is at its lowest level of tension or at post-crisis moments, the authors
support that non-state actors, such as international organisations, are the most effective in bringing
the parties to the negotiation table – widening their perspectives on the conflicts’ solution
possibilities and helping tension de-escalation by exerting procedural control over the negotiations
together with monitoring or facilitating agreement implementation.
Another advantage in the shift of mediator is that it offers the parties an alternative negotiation
channel to restart talks or to increase support for what has already been agreed and, therefore,
provides an extended opportunity to move a peace process forward (Crocker et al., 1999, p. 9).
Again, this sequencing of directive and non-directive strategies in moments of escalation and reescalation is dependent on the assumption that in the sequencing of mediator action there is
coordination in the approaches to the conflict. However, as the number of interveners increase,
conflicting interests and positions may exist between the mediators themselves, and for that reason
it is essential throughout the development and sustenance of a coordinated intervention strategy
to capitalise on the different types of mediation styles advantages and their effectiveness (ibid. pp.
40–41).
USA and UN Mediation of the 1963 Cyprus Crisis
‘The dire lack of a coordinated response, a sharing of resources, and a willingness to
subordinate particular national or institutional goals to an overriding peacemaking agenda
has hampered or destroyed several peace operations (...).’
Crocker et al., 1999, p. 57

78

MULTIPARTY MEDIATION IN CYPRUS IN 1963–1965

The sequencing of USA and UN mediation initiatives in the 1963 constitutional crisis in Cyprus,
with the USA mediation being effective in de-escalating the conflict and the UN offering an
alternative route to the stalemated American mediated negotiations, signalled the multiparty
potential of these combined initiatives. It is argued that although the USA and UN mediation
were carried out with the same objective of brokering an agreement between the Cypriot parties,
the lack of coordination, and unwillingness to do so, caused both individual initiatives to fail since
one held the comparative advantage that could have benefited the other. Sequencing allowed for
the comparative advantages of both mediators to capitalise, but the USA and the UN had
conflicting agendas which did not allow for coordination in approaches and for leverage
opportunities to be maximised.

USA Directive Mediation
The first mediation initiatives to take place in the Cyprus conflict were led by Great Britain. After
the collapse of constitutional rule in 1963 and the folding of the three-year-old Republic of Cyprus,
a British-sponsored Conference was organised in London in an attempt to devise a political
settlement between the communities and Greece and Turkey. Britain was eager to secure assistance
or, ultimately, relief to its Truce Force troops stationed in Cyprus and put forward a proposal for
the creation of a peacekeeping force constituted by the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) countries and a voluntary population movement for the formation of a territorial
divided Cyprus. Local Greek and Turkish administrative systems within a national political
arrangement were viewed by the British Government as meeting half way the aspirations between
the Greek Cypriot desire for union with Greece and the Turkish Cypriot demand for total
separation. However, Greek Cypriot reluctance to accept this proposal brought an early end to the
London Conference. To encourage a greater American involvement in formulating the agreement
seemed to the British the next step towards acquiring a NATO-based alternative to provide relief
to its Truce Force (Ker-Lindsay, 1997, pp. 83, 104–105).
Taking note that a British troops’ departure from Cyprus would pave the way for a Turkish
intervention, the USA became involved in the Cyprus crisis to prevent a war between Greece and
Turkey that could undermine NATO’s southern flank, alienate Turkey from the West and allow
expansion of Soviet influence in the Mediterranean. The Americans’ first mediation attempt came
from President Johnson himself, inviting Greece and Turkey for talks in Washington, but the
initiative failed to ease the growing intercommunal tensions on the island. Soon after, Johnson
directed his Under Secretary of State, George Ball, to mediate the search for an acceptable solution
for Greece and Turkey of the Cyprus problem. Development of the Anglo-American NATO Plan
began, which contemplated a NATO peacekeeping force – to expand the already stationed British
forces and to observe the cease-fire – and the appointment of a mediator who could seek a
settlement within the NATO framework and, therefore, within American and also Turkish
interests (Coufoudakis, 1974, p. 36).

79

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)

In his memoirs, Ball (1982, p. 342) described the Turkish flank positions at the time as follows:
‘Turkish Cypriots demanded partition and the right to govern their own community’ and
‘preserving Turkey’s right to intervene’ as a security assurance against Greek Cypriot attacks and
perceived domination intentions, a demand also emphasised by the Turkish Government. Ball also
mentioned that the USA considered that Turkey would never be deterred from this perceived
intervention right by a UN force, which would be viewed as a vehicle of Soviet involvement. As
for the Greek Cypriot leader, Makarios, Ball stated that he ‘wanted union with Greece’ but, ‘at least
for tactical purposes, was demanding a fully independent Cyprus run by the Greek majority’
where the Turkish Cypriot community would be reduced to a protected minority status, while the
Greek Government ‘pressed for enosis’ as well.
Through January that year, shuttling between Ankara, Athens and Nicosia, Ball was able to
gain support for the NATO Plan from Turkey, whose only precondition for acceptance was that
its right of intervention in Cyprus given by the Treaty of Guarantee4 would not be impaired. In
Athens, the political scene was dim, with caretaker governments succeeding each other and
probing Greece unable to sustain any position other than the one approved by Makarios
(Crawford, 2003, p. 109). Makarios’ acceptance then became the cornerstone for securing the
NATO Plan approval. However, Makarios vehemently opposed the Plan on the grounds that it
compromised Cypriot sovereignty and its non-aligned policies and put Cyprus under the orbit of
Western interests (Savvides, 1998, p. 40). He further insisted that the Cyprus problem should only
be addressed by the UN Security Council (James, 2002, p. 84). Through the UN framework,
Makarios believed a Turkish intervention would be ‘illegalised’ and blocked (Ball, 1982, p. 345) and
the Greek Cypriot sovereignty right would be recognised.5
Ball tried to frighten Makarios from his rigid position by suggesting that the USA and
Western countries would not intervene against Turkey and he proceeded to reformulate the initial
plan to exclude the necessity of Makarios’ consent on the creation of a peacekeeping force. In the
revised plan the peacekeeping force would be deployed not by NATO but by the three guarantor
powers simultaneously, exercising their rights of intervention provided by the Treaty of Guarantee.
This peacekeeping force would be set to stay in Cyprus until the UN deployed an international
force. With this condition, Ball assured Turkey the protection of the Turkish Cypriot community
while the UN took its time to formulate its action plan, at the same time assuring Britain of longdesired support to its troops (James, 2002, pp. 85–86).

4

5

In the Treaty of Guarantee, political or economic union with another country or the partitioning of the island are
forbidden and the United Kingdom, Greece and Turkey are invested ‘guarantor powers’ of the ‘independence,
territorial integrity and security of the Republic’ (art. 2) committing themselves to consult with each other and to
take concerted action if any of the provisions of the Constitution are breached.
This would come into being with the Security Council’s issuing of resolution 186, in which the legitimacy of the
Republic of Cyprus is recognised and within it is deposited the responsibility of restoring law and order in Cyprus.

80

MULTIPARTY MEDIATION IN CYPRUS IN 1963–1965

Despite Ball’s scare tactics, Makarios did not move from his previous position and Britain was
now displeased with Ball’s alteration of the plan which frustrated the purpose of Britain’s push for
USA involvement, that of divesting itself of the peacekeeping efforts in Cyprus altogether (Ball,
1982, p. 347). With the British refusal of the revised NATO plan, the USA realised the ‘only
available course was to work through the UN’ (ibid., p. 348). During debate sessions at the
Security Council, the USA pressed for a UN force to be quickly deployed in Cyprus to avoid a
Turkish military intervention, while successfully manoeuvring to prevent Soviet participation in
the force and to the rights of intervention by the Guarantors from being nullified in a resolution.6
Fearing that the USA was taking over the diplomatic initiative or, at least, that he would be
charged by the Soviet Union of allowing it, UN Secretary General U-Thant resisted accepting the
American proposal and suggested that the meeting be held on neutral ground with a neutral UN
mediator. Ball insisted that American authority was necessary if there was to be any
accomplishment to what U-Thant ceded by allowing Dean Acheson, the designated American
negotiator, to be present at the negotiations’ site in Geneva for the parties to consult with
(Savvides, 1998, p. 42). Sakari Tuomioja, the UN mediator, like the USA, viewed the Cyprus
dispute as international or regional in nature, as essentially a conflict of interests between Greece
and Turkey, the key actors between whom the settlement could be agreed. Nonetheless, contrary
to the USA, Tuomioja could not agree on enosis as the course for settlement, since it would mean
the dissolution of a UN member-state (Ker-Lindsay, 2005, p. 8).
Although the Geneva negotiations were conducted under UN aegis, Acheson was the one
who led the talks to circumvent Tuomioja in order to keep the UN and hence, Soviet influence
over Cyprus, at arm’s length (Nicolet, 2010, p. 105). For that reason, although Tuomioja was the
‘official’ mediator at Geneva, Dean Acheson’s proposals were the ones being discussed at the
negotiations’ table. The ‘Acheson Plan’ proposed a ‘double enosis’ (Ball, 1982, p. 356), meaning that
Cyprus would be united with Greece and divided into ten cantons; two enclaves would be under
full Turkish Cypriot control and Turkey would be granted a large and strategically important
military base on the island and the Kastellorizon island (Savvides, 1998, p. 42). The Plan was
rejected by both sides, but although Turkey accepted it as a basis for future negotiations, when
Makarios pronounced himself against it, Greece followed suit, fearful it would allow for an
increased Turkish presence on Cypriot soil. To persuade the Greek government, Acheson revised
the initial plan limiting the possession of the base by Turkey to a fifty-year lease and the territorial
division from cantons to prefects. But now not only the Cypriot and the Greek governments but
also Turkey was against it (ibid., pp. 42–43).

6

Security Council resolution 186 was ambiguous regarding intervention rights even to the extent of allowing the
parties to interpret it in opposite ways, with Makarios regarding it as an end to Turkish rights of intervention and
Turkey as a preservation of those rights (Ball, 1982, p. 348).

81

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)

Failing to consider what the Cypriot communities desired for Cyprus, the NATO and
Acheson plans were a classic exercise of great power diplomacy and realpolitik, where American
interests surpass all others and are blindly pursued and people become secondary to state interests
(Brinkley, 1988, pp. 15–18; Nicolet, 2010, p. 100). The USA preferred to neglect the fact that
Cyprus, although forged recently as a state, had not been under control of either Greece or Turkey
for decades or centuries and that these actors were not at the centre but at the periphery of the
Cyprus conflict. In the midst of the Cold War, USA mediation in Cyprus was devoted to
preventing the conflict’s internationalisation through UN involvement that could facilitate Soviet
progression into the eastern Mediterranean (Savvides, 1998, p. 40). Even when it was no longer
possible to maintain the UN at arm’s length the USA continued the isolated pursuit of a
settlement for the Cyprus conflict by marginalising the organisation’s role in its own mediation
initiative. Nonetheless, the USA was crucial to the avoidance of the conflict’s further escalation
into a Greco–Turkish war. However, guided by its own interests and solution preferences, the
USA perceived the Cyprus conflict as a regional and international clash and failed to recognise its
existence at the local level, from where in fact it had originated and from where its solution would
need to emerge.

The UN Takes Over the Impasse
With the death of Tuomioja in August 1964, U-Thant appointed Galo Plaza to continue the UN
mediation initiative. Instead of viewing the Cyprus conflict as an international or regional
problem, Plaza approached it in intrastate and communal terms (Ker-Lindsay, 2005, p. 9). When
the lead of the Cyprus mediation initiative was taken over by the UN the mediation target shifted
from the ‘motherlands’ to the communities – from searching for a solution to the problem in its
international and regional dimensions to its local one. In this new approach, Turkey’s interest
automatically became less relevant and less privileged in the proposed solution. It is argued below
that this shift in the mediation approach ultimately led to Turkey’s non-acceptance of Plaza’s
proposals and the termination of UN official mediation in Cyprus altogether.
The UN was motivated to mediate in the Cyprus conflict purely for humanitarian, conflict
management and peace re-establishment concerns, though, Security Council Resolution 186 did
recognise the legitimacy of the Republic of Cyprus and deposited in it the responsibility of
restoring law and order. Notwithstanding, this was not a product of a lack of neutrality in UN
intervention in the Cyprus conflict but a reflection of the organisation’s perception as to how its
preferred outcome could better be achieved, which at that stage centred on avoiding Turkey’s
military involvement (Reddaway, 1986, p. 552).
From 16 September 1964 to 26 March 1965, Plaza established headquarters in Nicosia and
visited the capitals of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom, performing three series of
consultations. The positions of the parties remained distant through the consultation phase and
each demanded unattainable preconditions to be met before entering into direct talks (para. 120),

82

MULTIPARTY MEDIATION IN CYPRUS IN 1963–1965

which Plaza considered to be vital for the success of the mediation efforts.7 Since it was not
possible for the parties to reach agreement among themselves and for direct negotiations to take
place under the ongoing conditions, the mediation reached an impasse. Putting forward his own
proposal for agreement was, to Plaza, the next essential step in an attempt to find common ground
that would ‘allow the parties to go as close as the circumstances permit to their legitimate
objectives’ (para. 121) and the ‘directions along which they should reasonably be expected to meet
and try to seek an agreement’ (para. 124).
Contrary to previous USA approaches, Plaza opposed the idea of dividing the island in any
form, whether it was enosis or partition, or even the creation of a federal state. Instead, Plaza
stressed the political unity of Cyprus as the basis for solution, one that should not deny the political
majority their right to rule but should be able to avoid dominance of one community over the
other and not jeopardise or delay indefinitely the unity of the population (para. 163). For Plaza, a
sustained long-term solution for Cyprus should be found within the framework of a unitary and
sovereign state capable of preventing supremacy of one community over the other while
promoting the communities’ integration. All parties involved should refrain from attempting to
restore the 1960 Constitution, which he believed to be ‘psychologically and politically impossible’
(para. 129) and pursue the creation of a new independent sovereign state of majority rule where
Turkish Cypriot minority rights would be protected (Coufoudakis, 1974, p. 36). For this new
independence to be established – one that differed from the Greek Cypriot demand of ‘unfettered
independence’ with the demand for self-determination – suspicion and fear would have to be
countered by Greek Cypriot abandonment of the political goals of enosis and reciprocated by
Turkish Cypriot abandonment of the pursuit of taksim (para. 137). In this sense, the right of selfdetermination would be exercised not by the communities individually but by the state, who
would be in the best position to decide what was best for the well-being of its citizens as a whole
and for international peace and security (para. 143). The protection of the Turkish Cypriot
community would not be assured by a geographical divide and the transfer of people, but through
the establishment of transitional yet ‘most rigorous possible guarantees’ (para. 160) of individual
and minority rights ‘without weakening the unity of the state’ (para. 163). Cyprus would be
demilitarised and the Treaties of Guarantee and Alliance abrogated (para. 147), but Plaza foresaw
the UN acting as the new Guarantor of Cyprus’ independence to meet Turkey’s security concerns
(para. 168).
The Plaza Report was eventually accepted as a basis for future negotiations by the Greek
Cypriots but rejected by Turkey and Turkish Cypriots who were not willing to agree on a proposal

7

Plaza regarded the consultations phase as an important first step leading to direct multilateral talks. Plaza stated
that direct talks should be held ‘at the earliest possible moment’ in a mediation process, however, he also found
these could not be hastened, otherwise, the absence of a ‘minimum common understanding’ between the parties
might risk ‘a further deepening of the impasse’ (1965, para. 89).

83

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)

that would nullify the Turkish right of intervention in Cyprus. During the consultation period
Turkey had expressed that it was beyond the remit of an intermediary to issue proposals on a
solution. Moreover, Turkey argued that Plaza’s proposals bore the moral stamp and force of the
UN as they were put forward by a UN mediator, therefore constituting an arbitrator’s and not a
mediator’s task (Plaza, 1965, p. 44). Turkey argued that in making his agreement proposals Plaza
went beyond the limits of his mandate, rejected the report and called for Plaza’s resignation. The
Greek Cypriots responded to the Turkish stand by refusing to accept a replacement in the event of
Plaza’s resignation. Faced with these reactions, U-Thant decided to make his good offices available
to the parties. Plaza resigned soon after but was never replaced, and the UN official mediation was
abandoned altogether (Ker-Lindsay, 2005, p. 9).
Despite its repercussions, Turkey’s argument that Plaza’s report bore the moral stamp of the
UN and his report-issuing was arbitrative is not a valid argument. The Plaza report provided for
a basis for settlement proposal negotiations and not a definite solution to be implemented as it
stood. Also, in an arbitration process the parties accept its binding character before any settlement
plan is presented to them. By putting forward a settlement proposal, Plaza was merely performing
formulative mediation and not one of an arbitrative nature. The Plaza mediation was refused not
because Turkey was irrevocably bound to accept the Plaza report as the definite settlement, but
because Plaza’s and the UN’s outcome preference was less aimed at satisfying Turkish interests
than the previous American proposals. The shift from the USA’s top–down to UN’s down–top
solution perspectives, which themselves were a product of these actors’ deferring views and interest
upon the Cyprus conflict, can better shed light on the causes for the breakdown of the first and
only UN official mediation in Cyprus. This event reduced the Organisation’s mediatory capacity
for years to come, finding itself limited to performing the least intrusive mediation strategies in
order to remain an acceptable intermediary to all parties under the ‘Good Offices’ framework.
The Missed Multiparty Mediation Opportunity
‘Like cats, these independent agents rarely feel an obligation, or even a desire, to cooperate
and they retain the ability to walk away from the mediation or to launch competing
initiatives.’
Croker et al., 1999, p. 4

The mediation initiatives led by the USA and the UN after the 1963 constitutional breakdown
in Cyprus had an ideal multiparty potential that was not recognised. Indeed it was refused by both
mediators. Realisation or a willingness to recognise this potential could have provided the
opportunity to avoid Plaza’s full-blown failure of UN official mediation, which has limited the
UN’s mediation capacity in the Cyprus conflict in subsequent years and, in the course of the peace
process in Cyprus. In mediating the Cyprus crisis, although the UN has enjoyed legitimacy power,
it reaps weak reward and coercive power capabilities and, hence, a lower control of the mediation

84

MULTIPARTY MEDIATION IN CYPRUS IN 1963–1965

process. On the other hand, while the USA has realised strong reward and coercive power and,
therefore, control over the mediation process, once it initiates mediation due to vested interests in
the conflict’s context, it is viewed as biased by conflict parties and has lower legitimacy power.
Notwithstanding, the USA and the UN had the ingredients for success set forth by multiparty
mediation supporters. Their interventions have been sequenced accordingly – of a powerful
mediator during periods of conflict escalation and of a pure mediator in the subsequent period of
lower conflict intensity.
The USA has been successful in de-escalating the Cyprus conflict and in pressuring the
parties into negotiating, nonetheless, in performing directive mediation, the USA impacted on the
conflict’s substance. The use of directive strategies altered the parties’ balance of power and their
expectations regarding the mediation outcome. The American mediation particularly affected
Turkey’s perspectives and expectations over the mediation process to the extent that the shift to
UN mediation was perceived as a positional loss. Once the USA mediation had put Greece and
Turkey at the centre of the Cyprus dispute, Turkey reacted to the (perceived) ‘downgrading’
conferred by Plaza, of its status from a main to a third party to the conflict.
Once Plaza approached the Cyprus conflict at its epicentre, targeting its local level and
viewing it in intercommunal terms (Ker-Lindsay, 2005, p. 9), the Plaza proposal offered a solution
which was routed in an entirely different direction to that suggested by the NATO and Acheson
proposals. The proposal did not fully satisfy any of the parties’ interests. It prevented Greece and
Greek Cypriots from achieving enosis and Turkish Cypriots and Turkey from partitioning the
island, although Turkish Cypriots would be protected from Greek Cypriot domination in the new
state. Turkey, however, would lose its only asset over Cyprus – its right of intervention – and be
de-linked from Cyprus’ future with no compensation. As a result, the move to UN mediation
meant a greater change for Turkey, with a shift from being the actor whose interests would mostly
have been satisfied in US mediation, to an actor whose interests were secondary to the Cyprus
solution in UN mediation.
Pushing the UN away from the solution-finding process in Cyprus thus became vital for
Turkey and consequently the motive for accusing Plaza of arbitration. By using the arbitration
accusation Turkey successfully transformed the mediation process into the issue in conflict that led
to Plaza’s mediation deadlock. This is an indicator of how little control the UN had over the
mediation process; not being adept at curbing the Turkish argument or in exerting influence over
the parties to prevent them from forsaking the mediation process. The Organisation was forced to
abandon official mediation and adopt the provision of good offices and watch as its mediatory
capacity diminished to a minimal facilitative mediator, until Waldheim assumed the good offices
provision in 1972.
Advocates of pure and muscled mediation are equally correct in their reasons for judging both
types of mediation performance as important. Contrarily, they fail to see that they are complementary,
that directive mediation’s positive impact on the probability of success of a mediation process can and

85

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)

should be used to complement pure mediation’s capacity to alter the parties’ relationship; to generate
trust through the use of reasoning and persuasion and the conception of alternatives to their
antagonistic aims. Conversely, like power mediation supporters, the USA did not even consider the
need for one that might address and improve the parties’ adversarial relationships in order for them
to remain open to making concessions towards the other side. The use of a facilitative mediation for
this purpose was performed in UN mediation by Plaza. However, as a pure mediator, the
organisation lacked control over the mediation process as well as the resources and power to pressure
the parties into staying at the negotiation table. Similar to power and pure mediation supporters, the
USA and the UN neither perceived nor capitalised on the complementarity between the directive
USA mediation and UN facilitative mediation, which was impaired by the USA’s pursuit of an
agreement along lines relevant to its own interests. Had this complementarity potential been
capitalised on, the USA may have constrained the parties against evading the UN’s mediation
process and the conflict’s subsequent re-escalation might have been avoided.
In addition, the multiparty mediation potential could have been capitalised on the different
conflict levels in which these mediators operated. On the one hand, the USA mediation failed to
account for the dynamics of the conflict at the local level and did not consider the local
communities’ interests in the agreement proposed. Then again, the UN mediation also failed to
take into account the influence of conflict dynamics at regional level on the local scene and
overlooked the impact of the ‘motherlands’ interests on local communities. As mentioned above,
while USA mediation could have benefited from Plaza’s down–top solution perspectives and the
need to target and accommodate Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot antagonisms, so too could
the USA have played an important role in coercing Turkey to remain at the negotiation table,
perhaps preventing the complete abandonment of UN official mediation.
When a universally accepted definition of a conflict is not upheld by intervening
international conflict managers, then attempts to craft a lasting solution are compromised
(Masunungure and Badza, 2010, p. 229). As a result, in the first mediation attempts of the Cyprus
conflict, the two mediators intervened uncooperatively and in isolation from one another.
Complementarity between the directive USA mediation and UN facilitative and formulative
mediation was not capitalised on either by the mediators, and was mainly impaired by the USA’s
pursuit of an agreement along the lines of self-interest. Had the multiparty potential of the USA
and UN mediation initiatives after the 1963 crisis in Cyprus been successfully exploited, it is
conceivable that Plaza’s mediation failure could have been avoided by the USA applying pressure
on Turkey to accept the Plaza proposal as a basis for future negotiations.
The above statement by Croker et al. refers to the involvement of third parties in a given
conflict, and not particularly to mediators. Regardless, it strikingly describes the behaviours of the
USA and UN mediators in between 1963–1965. During their mediation initiatives, the USA and
UN disorganised ‘cats’ failed to recognise and take advantage of the full conflict management and
resolution potential of their mutual involvement. Coordination between the USA and UN

86

MULTIPARTY MEDIATION IN CYPRUS IN 1963–1965

mediation does demonstrate a potential for success, with the USA being capable of exerting
pressure to prevent third parties from spoiling progress in the mediation procedure at the local level
and the UN being better equipped to work through the parties’ commitment problems and lack of
trust. Capitalising on these opportunities may well be beneficial to the ongoing mediation process
in Cyprus and in other UN-mediated conflicts where the USA may hold strategic interests.
_______________
References
Primary Sources
Acheson Plan (1964) Available at [http://www.cyprus-conflict.net/acheson_plan.html], accessed on 11
April 2011.
Ball, G.W. (1982) ‘Cyprus’, in The Past Has Another Pattern. New York: Norton, pp. 337–359.
Constitution of the Republic of Cyprus (1960).
Plaza, G. (1965) ‘Report of the United Nations Mediator on Cyprus to the Secretary-General’, s/6253,
26 May.
United Nations Secretary General (2003) ‘Report of the Secretary-General on his Mission of Good Offices
in Cyprus’, Report s/2003/398, 1 April.
United Nations Security Council (1964) ‘Resolution 186’, 4 March.
Secondary Sources
Azar, E. (1990) The Management of Protracted Social Conflict: Theory & Cases. Aldershot: Dartmouth.
Beardsley, K., Quinn, D.M., Biswas, B. and Wilkenfeld, J. (2006) ‘Mediation Style and Crisis Outcomes’,
Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 1, No. 50, pp. 58–86.
Bercovitch, J. and Gartner, S.S. (2009) ‘Is There a Method in the Madness of Mediation?’, in Bercovitch, J.
and Gartner, S.S. (eds), International Conflict Mediation: New Approaches and Findings. New York:
Routledge, pp. 19–42.
Bercovitch, J. and Lee, S-M. (2001) ‘Mediating International Conflicts: Examining the Effectiveness of
Directive Strategies’, The International Journal of Peace Studies, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 1–17.
Brinkley, D. (1988) ‘The Cyprus Question: Dean Acheson as Mediator’, Journal of the Hellenic Diaspora,
Vol. 15, No. 3/4, pp. 5–18.
Carment, D., Samy, Y. and El Achkar, S. (2009) ‘Protracted Conflict and Crisis Mediation’, in Bercovitch, J.
and Gartner, S.S. (eds), International Conflict Mediation: New Approaches and Findings. New York:
Routledge, pp. 216–239.
Coufoudakis, V. (1974) ‘Cyprus – July 1974; or Acheson’s Failure, Kissinger’s Success’, Hellenic American
Society, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 35–42. New York: Pella Publishing.
Crawford, T.W. (2003) Pivotal Deterrence: Third-Party Statecraft and the Pursuit of Peace. New York:
Cornell University Press.
Crocker, C.A., Hampson, F.O. and Aall, P. (eds) (1999) Herding Cats: Multiparty Mediation in a Complex
World. Washington DC: United States Institute of Peace.
Fisher, R.J. (2001) ‘Cyprus: The Failure of Mediation and the Escalation of an Identity-Based Conflict to an

87

THE CYPRUS REVIEW (VOL. 25:2 FALL 2013)
Adversarial Impasse’, Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 3, No. 38, pp. 307–326.
Fisher, R.J. and Keashley, L. (1991) ‘The Potential Complementarity of Mediation and Consultation within a
Contingency Model of Third Party Intervention’, Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 1, No. 28, pp. 29–42.
Frazier, D.V. and Dixon, W.J. (2009) ‘Third Party Intermediaries and Negotiated Settlements, 1946–2000’,
in Bercovitch, J. and Gartner, S.S. (eds), International Conflict Mediation: New Approaches and
Findings. New York: Routledge, pp. 43–66.
Güney, A. (2004) ‘The USA’s Role in Mediating the Cyprus Conflict: A Story of Success or Failure?’,
Security Dialogue, Vol. 1, No. 35, pp. 27–42.
Haxia, Q. (2007) ‘A Comparison of the Effectiveness of International Conflict Mediation Strategies’,
Chinese Journal of International Politics, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 589–622.
James, A. (2002) Keeping the Peace in the Cyprus Crisis of 1963–64. London: Palgrave.
Ker-Lindsay, J. (1997) ‘The Origins of the United Nations Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP): International
Politics on the Road to United Nations Security Council Resolution 186 (1964)’. PhD Thesis,
University of Kent.
——— (2005) From U-Thant to Kofi Annan: UN Peacemaking in Cyprus, 1964–2004. South East
European Studies at Oxford (SEESOX) occasional paper series, 5/05. St Antony’s College, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK, pp. 1–30. Available at [http://www.sant.ox.ac.uk/ seesox/occasionalpapers/kerlindsay2005.pdf], accessed on 25 February 2011.
Terris, L.G. and Maoz, Z. (2005) ‘Rational Mediation: A Theory and a Test’, Journal of Peace Research, Vol.
42, No. 5, pp. 563–593.
Masunungure, E.V. and Badza, S. (2010) ‘The Internationalization of the Zimbabwe Crisis: Multiple Actors,
Competing Interests’, Journal of Developing Societies, Vol. 2, No. 26, pp. 207–231.
Nicolet, C. (2010) ‘The Development of US Plans for the Resolution of the Cyprus Conflict in 1964: “The
Limits of American Power”’, Cold War History, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 95–126.
Quinn, D., Wilkenfeld, J., Smarik, K. and Asal, V. (2009) ‘Power Play: Mediation in Symmetric and
Asymmetric International Crises’, in Bercovitch, J. and Gartner, S.S. (eds), International Conflict
Mediation: New Approaches and Findings. New York: Routledge, pp. 187–215.
Reddaway, J. (1986) ‘Cyprus – The British Connection’, International Relations, Vol. 8, No. 6, pp. 528–556.
Richmond, O.P. (1998a) ‘Devious Objectives and the Disputants’ View of International Mediation: A
Theoretical Framework’, Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 6, No. 35, pp. 707–722.
——— (1998b) Mediating in Cyprus: The Cypriot Communities and the United Nations. London: Frank
Cass Publishers.
Savun, B. (2009) ‘Mediator Types and the Effectiveness of Information–Provision Strategies in the
Resolution of International Conflict’, in Bercovitch, J. and Gartner, S.S. (eds), International Conflict
Mediation: New Approaches and Findings. New York: Routledge, pp. 96-114.
Savvides, P.K. (1998) ‘US Foreign Policy towards Cyprus: Is the “Theory of Continuity” Still Relevant?’,
Journal of the Hellenic Diaspora, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 31–59. New York: Pella Publishing.
Smith, J.D. (1994) ‘Mediator Impartiality: Banishing the Chimera’, Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 4, No.
31, pp. 445–450.
Zartman, I.W. and Touval, S. (1996) ‘International Mediation in the Post-Cold War Era’, in Crooker, C.A.
and Hampson, F.O. with Aall, P. (eds), Managing Global Chaos: Sources of and Responses to
International Conflict. Washington DC: United States Institute of Peace Press, pp. 445–461.

88

