Martin Dennis OKWIR

2014

Introduction
No two conflicts play out through one common script, and therefore no two
conflicts are experienced in the same way(s). Peacebuilding is therefore a
highly subjective and contextual enterprise, and the application of any
aforethought framework runs the risk of administering prescriptions based
on reductionist and minimalist understanding of the conflict situation that
instead bring distant ‘lessons learnt’ to situations that have very specific
dynamics and beg more knowledge generation than application of theories.
This essay argues that while indicative frameworks for peacebuilding in
post-conflict societies have been suggested by numerous researchers, policy
makers and scholars, these frameworks have predominantly been
predicated upon the Wilsonian liberal peace theory which is both
reductionist and minimalist in its over emphasis of democratic ideals of
justice and freedom as the cornerstone of sustainable peace. The essay
further supposes that the understanding of conflicts as resulting from
development deficits (Mark Duffield, 2001) that took the centre stage of
international peacebuilding efforts is instrumentalist and can only serve the
strategic and geopolitical interests of powerful industrialised nations while
undermining the emergence of legitimate and independent political
authority in war affected societies. The thesis of this article is therefore that
peacebuilding designs have largely failed leading to resurgences of violent
conflicts because they are based on a flawed foreign model, they undermine
the emergence of legitimate governance architecture in post conflict
societies and they play into the hands of local powerbrokers whose interests
are not served by the attainment of sustainable peace and are therefore bent
on sustaining the conflict as a mutual enterprise, and a means to perpetuate
and maintain their powers and hegemonies.
In demonstrating the above argument, this article shall draw on empirics
from a wide range of scholars such as Peter Uvin; Eriksen Stern; Paris and
Sisk; David Chandler; Stuart Gordon; Torjesen, Stina and MacFarlane;
Sara Phillip and others. The essay shall also call onto a wide range of
examples, including and not limited to the Middle East and Africa.
This essay shall proceed as follows. A snapshot of the liberal peace thesis
shall be revisited, relating it to a review of the common messages that are
both implicit and explicit in most ‘peacebuilding frameworks’. Using
Page 1 of 13

examples from different post-conflict interventions, I shall then demonstrate
how this tenet beliefs of the liberal peace theory that informs most
peacebuilding interventions have:





Been based on a flawed model of one size fits all and incorrect
assumptions that do not respond to the contexts in question.
Undermined the emergence of competent, legitimate, and
independent government architecture in post-conflict societies
through the state-building approach, undermining the achievement
of sustainable peace.
Played into the hands of powerful stakeholders and parties whose
interests are in sustaining the conflict status quo that harnesses their
powers and positions.

This essay shall then recommend certain considerations, and consciously
so, not a framework, that take account of the variant contexts that
differentiates not only between conflicts, but also characterises the ebb and
flow of different conflict situation over time, before offering a conclusion.

The Liberal Peace Thesis
“Democracy contributes to safety and prosperity – both in national life and in
international life – it’s that simple.” – Strobe Talbott – US Deputy

Secretary of State, 1997.
The above statement by Strobe Talbott in 1997 probably best captures, if
poignantly, the faith that underpins the liberal peace thesis that has shaped
most peacebuilding interventions of recent times.
The liberal peace thesis, also referred to as the Wilsonian approach to peacebuilding is premised on the belief that liberal market democracies are the
forms of government best suited for the achievement of national and
international peace and harmony, not least because they enjoy popular
domestic support and can be held accountable by electorates; they are less
likely to go to war against each other and less likely to apply excessive force
against their people in the resolution of contestations (Paris S, 2009) and
respects the rights of the governed. As articulated by Wilson Woodrow after
the First World War, this approach to peacebuilding argues that the

Page 2 of 13

strength of liberal democratic states do no rest on their military might, but
on the free consent of their populations.
The undercurrent that serves the liberal peace thesis is a common ground
found in the works of both Thomas Hobbes and John Locke, who both
agree to the need to surrender sovereign power to govern onto an individual
or a group of people who runs the state on behalf of the people, while
enjoying legitimacy from the governed. Therefore, through democratic
elections, the liberal peace thesis believes that the people govern themselves
through representation, while the government creates the environment and
institutions favourable for the free market competition in the process of
liberalizing the economy, culminating into not only harmonious mutual
coexistence, but also prosperity.
Yet the fast disappearance of the Hobbesian leviathans in many conflictaffected and fragile territories means that liberal peace thinkers are
assuming away one of the most challenging and complex tasks of
peacebuilding of our time, being the creating of functioning and legitimate
governments, as evidenced by the spiralling number of intrastate conflicts
characterised by state failure and lack of legitimate governments. This
brings into question whether the liberal peace thesis offers competent
remedies to the latest generation conflicts, especially with quick reversals to
conflict in countries such as Angola, Rwanda and Liberia. Further, in stark
contradiction to Hobbes and Locke, the human rights discourse and the
deepening interconnectedness of the world making people even in far off
territories stakeholders and actors in events and phenomena in other places,
the governed have continued to get empowered, if only through
accessibility of information from and to them. Politically, this means that
everywhere is fast becoming the epicentre of political influence, and
nowhere is exactly a periphery; a phenomenon that can only serve to
weaken the position of the leviathan. Arguably, the increasing centres of
political powers and contestations that comes with political and market
liberalizations have constituted a great discomfiture to the powers of the
classical powerful authoritarian state hegemony, partly accounting for the
increasing cases of state failure, contestations over territorial sovereignties
and increasingly failing cases of international peacebuilding efforts.
Granted, developed industrialised democracies have tended to be more
peaceful as proven by a myriad of empirics, not least because they have
better developed institutions capable of resolving conflicts peacefully
Page 3 of 13

(Acemogulu, et al, 2001), and have mature democratic culture, while
whether democratization and market liberalization actually builds peace in
fragile post-conflict societies remains a question to be answered.

International Peacebuilding: A Tale of
“Underwhelming” Outcomes
Having reflected on the fundamentals of the liberal peace thesis, I now turn
my attention to the major points of my argument. I shall substantiate my
thesis, stated above through three arguments, that peacebuilding
interventions have not performed well with the current generation of civil
conflicts because it’s based on the liberal peace thesis, which is a flawed
foreign model, it undermines the emergence of competent and legitimate
governments, and have played into the hands of powerful actors whose
interests, powers and positions are maintained through the protraction of
these conflicts.

The Liberal Peace Approach as a Flawed Model
The liberal peace is a flawed foreign model unfit for application in most
non-European post-conflict societies. In his introspection over the
peacebuilding attempts in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
Eriksen Stern (2009) in his work, “The Liberal Peace is Neither: Peacebuilding,
State-building and the Reproduction of Conflict in the DRC”, suggests that the
efforts haven’t had much success because it’s a flawed model based of a one
size fits all assumption that do not sufficiently take into account the local
Congolese context and dynamics. He argues that the interest of the
international community to establish a liberal democratic state in the DRC
has failed due to amongst other factors a lack of local allies for the process
and has in return resulted to the reproduction of state weakness. It’s also
noteworthy, that cultures, behaviours and ‘history’ doesn’t exactly die. In
post conflict societies such as the DRC and even the pre-genocide Rwanda,
a culture of structural violence, elite reproduction and systematic exclusion
of a major part of the population are so entrenched that these vices only
reshape and are carried along into new institutional structures (Woolcock,
et al, 2011). These continuities are pivotal in understanding the survival of
conflicts and the quick return to violence that is witnessed in many post
conflict and fragile states. Drawing on the example of Northern Uganda,
many reports indicate that even with very vibrant campaign networks
Page 4 of 13

against violence, the culture of aggression has continued to infect the society
at different levels, including and not limited to domestic settings, with
sometimes the groups quickly labelled as the victims (women and children)
becoming the culprits. At the centre of this phenomenon is the difficulty of
dismantling the architecture of violence that is constructed in conflict states
and societies that transcends most peacebuilding interventions with limited
timeframes and place too much faith in elections and market liberalisations,
which as Paris and Sisk (2009) posits are inherently conflictual themselves
and fragile states do not have the institutional capacities to manage these
contestations without resorting to vortexes of violence. Experience from
Rwanda relays a strong correlation between international peacebuilding
efforts and the reproduction of elite alienation of the masses and shaming
that prepared the ground for one of the dirtiest ethnic violence of our time
(Uvin, 1998). Uvin states that the international aid system was constitutive
of the local politics in Rwanda and vice vasa, a relationship that was to
widen the rift between the Hutus and the Tutsis, with the former feeling
cheated, humiliated and excluded from national processes – a phenomenon
that generated anger for the genocide of 1994.
Yet the sheer fact that the international community continued with business
as usual in Rwanda until everyone woke up to such a shocking spate of
ethnic cleansing demonstrates how detached the much harped liberal peace
model is, and its limited potential to build sustainable peace in distant
territories. In the DRC on the other hand, the emphasis on the creation of
liberal democratic institutions capable of sustaining peace in an area
dominated by uncooperative powerful actors has resulted to the emergence
of even weaker and unpopular institutions of government that have served
to further dampen the hopes of achieving sustainable peace in the region.
International peacebuilding frameworks certainly provide very logical
theoretic conceptions on how to build sustainable peace in conflict affected
societies, yet whether it is applicable across different situations on the
ground is yet to be demonstrated. From these empirical perspective and
from the field experiences in the cases cited, because they are predominated
with creating liberal peace models, peacebuilding interventions have not
resulted to the desired self-sustaining peace. Having looked discussed my
first argument, following is my second point of argument is support of my
thesis.

Page 5 of 13

Undermining the Emergence of Legitimate Sovereign
Governments
Current peacebuilding frameworks undermine the emergence of competent,
legitimate and independent governments in post conflict societies. Most
conflicts, especially the highly prevalent civil conflicts have been blamed on
state failure or state fragility in these respective areas, with Somalia coming
to mind instantly. It also follows that juxtaposing the capacity of the South
Sudan government against that of most of the developed peaceful countries
can only demonstrate that countries need strong, independent and
legitimate governments to be able to manage societal affairs and allow for
peace to flourish and sustain. Notwithstanding this view, empirics and
lessons from recent peacebuilding efforts strongly suggests that
international peacebuilding efforts have undercut the emergence of
competent, legitimate and independent governments in societies emerging
from violent conflicts. In no uncertain terms, David Chandler (2006)
deplores the establishment of “phantom states” through international
peacebuilding enterprises in his work, “Empire in Denial…” Chandler argues
that international state-building undertakings in post-conflict societies have
resulted to weak governments that are pawns in the hands of the
international community and owes their existence and accountabilities not
to the governed, but to the donor community on whose endorsement and
resources they survive. These emerging governments lacks the legitimacy
and independence that are prerequisite for representing and furthering the
interests and aspirations of their citizenry. One may argue that the
continued insurgency in Iraq represents the dialectics between a people
feeling betrayed by their government serving foreign interests and a
government caught between the aspirations of its expectant nationals and
external strategic interests that are at odds with the reasons the Iraqi public
accepted to stand up against the regime of Saddam Hussein. This same
tenor is reverberated by Paris and Sisk (2009) who argues that international
post conflict interventions are rife with debilitating contradictions and
dilemmas that have potentials to leave behind counter-productive
outcomes. Paris and Sisk argues that the use of external control is at odds
with the emergence of local ownership, while international presence is
always intrusive and have potential to overwhelm fragile states emerging
from conflict. Ghani, Lockhart and Carhanan (2005) have argued that the
international presence in Afghanistan have hindered the development of
Page 6 of 13

strong government as it has drawn qualified and competent human resource
base away from low paying government positions into the international
humanitarian and development organizations, and have further chocked
the country with too much financial resources that have sent corruption
levels soaring skywards. While still on the example of Afghanistan, reports
indicate that true to the trepidation of Mary B. Anderson (1999), the
peacebuilding enterprise there is fast legitimizing the positions of provincial
warlords who are seen to have even greater de facto powers and legitimacy
that the embryonic Afghan government (Stuart, 2011). In this same study,
Stuart also found that the international resources injected into the provinces
have not only further flamed inter-tribal conflicts, but have also become
perverse incentives for perpetuating and protracting insecurity as a means
to sustain the aid tap open. Experience from Somalia also shows this same
tendencies, as it is believe that the payment of protection moneys to
warlords and strong men functioned to both recognize their control rights
over territories and legitimise their authority, and also prolong the conflict
there by both providing the logistics to sustain the warfighting and by
indirectly increasing islands of power and influence outside the emerging
government in Mogadishu, hence undermining the legitimacy and
sovereignty of the government. Seen from these examples, while modern
peacebuilding enterprises preoccupy themselves with the quick creation or
recreation of strong and legitimate governments in post conflict societies, in
practice they have majorly failed and seems to have largely done just the
opposite, by undermining the emergence of the state structure they favour,
leading to continued fragility or even continued vortexes of violence in post
conflict societies. Having looked at the hindrance to the emergence of
legitimate and competent governments in post-conflict states, I now turn
my attention to my third and final point of argument.

Playing into the Hands of Powerful Local Stakeholders
My final point of argument is that peacebuilding interventions have played
into the hands of powerful actors whose interests and positions are
advanced through the conflict situation. This is now increasingly the case
with the increasing incidences of civil conflicts resulting from state-fragility
and increasing distribution of powers in the hands of different competing
groups and individuals within countries where the conflict has turned into
a mutual enterprise. Peacebuilding efforts inevitably require dependable
local stakeholders on whom the peace process can be invested. Of course
Page 7 of 13

since these has to be prominent and influential people capable of garnering
support for the peace efforts. It also follows that some of the most prominent
stakeholders in post-conflict societies are people closely associated with
conflict such as warlords, former rebel leaders and politicians who thrive on
the rhetoric of divisive politics. While the dangers that involving these
people in peacebuilding efforts brings are apparent, excluding them from
the process is simply not practical and sets the process against local power
structures right from the start. Peace builders are therefore left with little
option but to work with them and only hope that the system is pragmatic
enough to deter them from becoming further agents of trouble.
Yet as Eriksen Stern (2009) demonstrated from the DRC, these local
stakeholders are engaged in the conflict not to win, but to keep the state
structures weak enough to create the power vacuum within which shadow
economies can flourish while keeping their positions privileged enough to
take advantages of locally available resources. The mutual enterprise of
conflict entrepreneurship in the DRC is so deeply engrained in the conflict
that any attempt to divorce it from any peace process is an effort in futility,
yet this mutuality is instrumental in protracting the conflict and sustaining
the powers and positions of these elusive actors (Kaldor, 1999). In her work,
“Angola: Woe to the Vanquished” in “In the Shadow of ‘Just Wars’”,
Christine Messiant (2004) relays a hideous silence on the part of the United
Nations (UN) in spite of evidenced of knowledge of very inhumane
treatment of civilian populations in the rural areas of Angola, both in the
hands of the rebels and government troops during the bloody conflict there.
This silence, Messiant reports was nudged by the desperate need of the UN
to remain operational in the country, as speaking out had earlier triggered
their expulsion by the Angolan government and were keen on maintaining
a face in the country and internationally. In the same wave, countries such
as France among others who were competing to get their hands on Angolan
rich mineral resource were reluctant to expose the war’s true human costs,
as they continued to fund peace efforts through a government they were
only too aware was rife with corruption, foul play and had the temerity to
intimidate them with threats of expulsion. This is akin to experience from
Somalia where the process of licensing aid organizations by warlords in
areas away from the transitional government in Mogadishu continue to
stand at odds with efforts to end the conflict and attain sustainable peace
(Bradbury, 2010). In a conflict zone where international humanitarian field
Page 8 of 13

craft is shaped by increasing insecurity to humanitarian actors and a
reduction in the humanitarian space, the result of such field shaped
operations can only serve to strengthen the leverage of these separatist
leaders and undermine the possibility of a united peace effort and a return
to sustainable peace. Sara Phillips (2011) offers yet another practical lesson
from Yemen, arguing that the US’s peacebuilding efforts there are illconceived by attempting to address a political problem through
development funding that have helped to create a patronage system,
centralization of power and disparity of income levels that are all only too
distant from responding to the political roots of the Yemeni conflict. The
mismatch between the required need to win local legitimacy by the Yemeni
government and the reductionist understanding of the political crisis in the
country have continued to build local discontent against the government,
leaving a void that has been quickly filled by the Al-Qaeda in the Arab
Peninsular (AQAP). A key requirement for establishing lasting peace in
Yemen should involve the reaffirmation of the Yemeni government’s
legitimacy through the dismantling of the patronage system, largely seen as
unjust and representing enemy (American) interests. This might reduce and
later dismember the vacuum currently being occupied by AQAP, giving
chance for sustainable peace networks to emerge. Patronage systems may
appear to be stable in the short run, yet their stability depends on the
availability of massive amounts of resources and power, and systematic
exclusion, reductions of which mostly constitutes the start of the unravelling
of the otherwise stable looking systems (Torjesen et al, 2007). This situation
is even made worse by the polarised nature of post conflict environments,
where people may buy into divisive ethnic appeals during times of elections,
paving ways for leaders who have benefited from the conflict situation to
entrench their powers over affairs of society.
It’s therefore important for peace-building interventions to be attentive to
their risks of playing by the rules of powerful conflict entrepreneurs and to
serve the very negative interests they are trying to beat, as have been the
case in the examples presented above, if sustainable peace is to be achieved
in fragile post-conflict societies.
The arguments given above demonstrates that while the international
community places such esteemed confidence in internationally led peacebuilding undertakings, these efforts have fallen far short of expectations in
achieving liberal democratic governments; have undermined the emergence
Page 9 of 13

of independent and legitimate governments and have in many cases served
to entrench the negative interests parties they seek weaken in order to create
avenue for sustainable peace to emerge, mature and thrive.

Reflections on Way Forward
I now reflect on a few way forwards. It’s vital to note that I use the terms
“way forwards” deliberately, as my arguments inherently indicates that
post-conflict peacebuilding interventions have largely failed because they
are ill conceived, they pay little or no attention to the dynamics of the
conflict/ fragility on the ground, and need to better manage the interests
and involvement of local actors that have potentials to result to negative
outcomes. I am therefore reluctant to suggest an alternative framework,
since every conflict situation has their own dynamisms and requires humble
learning first, before designing interventions in response to these dynamics.
These considerations may provide skeletal guides for peacebuilding
interventions to ponder at field level, creating context specific field crafts
befitting for each conflict situation:




Learning from the field. While existing frameworks have found
favour in literature, results on the ground indicates that they are
attempts to impose lessons that are distant from most conflict
situations, both in time and geographically. They therefore are at
odds with complexities on the ground and fails to pick valuable
lessons from local resilience mechanisms that are not only important
in keeping relevant to the particular conflict situation(s), but are also
key in achieving mechanisms that can both be owned and sustained
at the local levels, by the people whose experience of the conflict
should define the path of action.
Secondly, it’s very important that the emergence of government in
post conflict societies are carried out in ways that foster the
emergence of local accountability and legitimacy. Governments
should reflect the aspirations of the governed, as opposed to the
donors’ strategic interests. Democracy and self-sustaining
liberalization are not ideals that can be achieved through speedy
instrumental elections and opening up market spaces. It’s important
to note that these ideals are cultures to be learned, practiced and
managed through institutions, and this takes both time, and the
Page 10 of 13



space for local voiced to be heard, taken into account and
institutionalised through deliberate systems (Acemogulu, ohnson
and Robinson, 2001). The time required for this culture is
important, not least because in the immediate aftermath of violent
conflict, the major powerbrokers are likely to be individuals and
groups whose positions are linked to the conflict, and so time is vital
for such leaders to lose currency and mileage, while alternative
centres of power and new discourses of peace emerge.
Finally, a more nuanced understanding of the drivers of a particular
conflict, and some of the violence that were tolerated by society even
before the conflict is vital in building sustainable peace in any
conflict affected society. In most cases, reductionist theoretical
explanations of conflict are perpetuated by outsiders without
understanding the particulars of a conflict situation extending right
from periods before the overt conflict, through to the post-conflict
situation. These bird-eye view of conflicts have led to the
perpetuation of naming and labelling that informs the emergence of
interventions that do not address the problems on the ground. A
study conducted in the eastern DRC found some unsettling contrasts
between the labelling of ‘victims’ to mean the civilian population,
and culprits to be synonymous with soldiers. In their groundbreaking work, Maria Baaz and Maria Stern found this discourse
problematic to the extent that it is encouraging continued
victimization of people involved in the rebellion (Eriksson, Baaz and
Stern, 2008). In their work, they found that the youth within the
military ranks are drawn from communities that have been reduced
to nothing and had no chance at all, they are treated in the most
inhumane ways within the military ranks and ridiculed, shamed and
excluded by society, only to be labelled as perpetuators later in
peacebuilding programming. This same phenomenon is witnessed
in northern Uganda too, as the children who are abducted and return
from captivity continue to suffer a plethora of stigmatization,
exclusion and humiliation from their own communities. Unless such
legacies of violence are understood and addressed, that we arrive at
long term and self-sustaining peace is but a distant illusion.

Page 11 of 13

Conclusions
This essay is a re-examination of peacebuilding and its ability to achieve
sustainable peace in conflict affected societies. It revisited the Wilsonian
peace approach as one with long-held confidence in democracy and market
liberalisation as the form of government best suited for peaceful coexistence
within and without the state and general human progress.
The major argument presented by this essay is that international
peacebuilding efforts have failed to achieve sustainable peace in most recent
conflict affected societies resulting to quick reversal to violence and or
continued conflict. This was substantiated by three arguments. Firstly, that
the liberal peace model highly favoured by most internationally led
peacebuilding efforts is a flawed model inapplicable across different conflict
situations. Secondly, that heavy international presence in post conflict
peacebuilding efforts have undermined the emergence of independent,
competent and legitimate governments which are a prerequisite for
sustainable peace and self-governance. Finally, that peacebuilding
interventions have played into the hands of powerful local powerbrokers
shoes interests are not in the achievement of peace, but rather in continued
war making and state weakness as a precondition for the maintenance of
their powers and interests.
Alternatively, this essay offered final reflections on some considerations to
inform peacebuilding operations, privileging field learning to inform
specific peacebuilding programing; emphasizing that agency should be
given to local actors in shaping the future of conflict affected societies, with
enough time allowed for a democratic culture and alternative non-violent
power structure to emerge, and for local experiences of conflict that
addresses the very specifics of the conflict, with analysis right from the preconflict societal relations that may define the pattern of the conflict to affect
interpretations and interventions in contrast to theoretic bird-eyed
explanations that may be both reductionist and minimalist.

Page 12 of 13

Bibliography
Acemoglu, D, Johnson, S and Robinson, J [AJR] (2001) The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation, American Economic Review 91
Bradbury, M. (2010) State-building, Counterterrorism and Licensing Humanitarianism in
Somalia
Chandler, D. (2006) Empire in Denial: The Politics of State-building. Pluto.
Duffield, M. (2001) Global Governance and the New Wars. Zed, Chapter 1
Eriksen, S. (2009) The Liberal Peace Is Neither: Peacebuilding, Statebuilding and the
Reproduction of Conflict in the Democratic Republic of Cong’, International Peacekeeping
Eriksson Baaz, Maria, and Maria Stern (2008) Making Sense of Violence: Voices of
Soldiers in the Congo (DRC). The Journal of Modern African Studies 46, 1, pp. 5786.
European Centre for Conflict Prevention (ECCP), (1999) People Building Peace:
Inspiring Storied from Around the World. Utrecht, Netherlands: ECCP.
Ghani, A., Lockhart, C., & Carhanan, M. (2005) Closing the Sovereignty Gap: an
Approach to State-Building. Mimeo. Overseas Development Institute.
Gordon, S. (2011) Winning Hearts and Minds? Examining the Relationship Between Aid
and Security in Afghanistan’s Helmand Province. Mimeo. Feinstein International
Centre.
Jeong, H. (…) Peacebuilding in Postconflict Societies: Strategy and Process
Kaldor, M. (1999) New and Old Wars: Organised Violence in a Global Era, Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Le More, Anne, Killing with Kindness: Funding the Demise of a Palestinian State,
International Affairs, vol. 81, no. 5, 2005.
Lederach, P (1997) Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies.
Washington, DC: United Institute of Peace Press.
Paris, R., and T.Sisk (2009) Conclusion: Confronting the Contradictions, in Paris, R., and
T.Sisk (eds.), The Dilemmas of Statebuilding: Confronting the Contradictions of Postwar
Peace Operations. Routledge.
Phillips, S. (2011) Al-Qaeda and the Struggle for Yemen, Survival, 53, 1
Reychler, L., and Paffenholz, T., eds (2001) Peacebuilding: A Field Guide. Boulder,
CO: Lynne Reynner Publishers.
Theidon, K. (200) Reconstructing Masculinities: The Disarmament, Demobilization, and
Reintegration of Former Combatants in Colombia, Human Rights Quarterly, vol. 31.
Torjesen, S., and MacFarlane, N. R before D: The Case of Post-conflict Reintegration in
Tajikistan, in Conflict, Security and Development, vol. 7, no. 2, June 2007.
Uvin, P. (1998), Aiding Violence: The Development Enterprise in Rwanda. Kumarian
Press.
Woodward, S (200) Economic Priorities for Successful Peace Implementation, in Stedman
et al., Ending Civil Wars.

Page 13 of 13

