Peace Education in North Cyprus: A Phenomenological Approach
Hakan Karahasan
Eastern Mediterranean University (Cyprus)

Abstract
This paper discusses multiculturalism and peace education in order to illuminate the
significance of face-to-face, daily interactions. It argues that this could be a useful way
to promote peace education in Cyprus. Although people could be able to cross the
borders and can ‘see the other half of their homeland’ since 2003, Cyprus still lacks of a
common educational policy as indicated by Michalinos Zembylas and Hakan Karahasan
in 8th CiCe conference. The paper is qualitative and focuses on the curriculum in the
northern Cyprus in general and how, on personal level, peace education could be
promoted.

Individuals are both objects and subjects within networks of communicative interaction.
(Georg Simmel)
Introduction
It is well known that citizens are involved in the creation of ‘life worlds’ which form the
background for individuals to exist both as subjects and objects in the process of
interaction. The significance of face-to-face interactions on a daily basis is that the actors
in the process of communication are simultaneously agents of change as well as
continuity. This paper specifically examines the possibilities of promoting peace
education within the Turkish Cypriot context. Given the dynamics of interaction in
which ‘individuals are both objects and subjects’ peace education could be seen as a selfreflective discourse to create the possibility of genuine dialogue at the political and
social levels.
The rationale of the research is that micro-level interactions more often than not form the
basis for macro-level transformations. Any simple act of communicative interaction by
its very nature involves diverse intentions to negotiate meaning. If citizens are active in
the process of interaction, then, could they be the ones for promoting peace education in
Northern Cyprus?
As Bekerman (2005) argues, although children go to the same school and take classes
together in the bi-lingual school in Israel, when they go back to their homes, they hear
similar stories or live their life in an environment that is based on the notion of us and
them discourse, and this in a way clearly shows the significance of daily interaction
between people and how individuals are ‘both as subjects and objects in the process of
interaction’. In other words, it can be argued that education itself is not the only thing
that will help mutual trust and understanding but it is through individuals’ interaction
that meaning is given to issues like peace education.
This paper is part of Citizenship Education in Society: Proceedings of the ninth Conference of the Children’s
Identity and Citizenship in Europe Thematic Network, ed Ross A, published by CiCe (London) 2007.
ISBN 978-1899764-90-7; ISSN 1470-6695
Funded with support from the European Commission SOCRATES Project of the Department of Education and Culture. This publication
reflects the views of the authors only, and the Commission cannot be help responsible for any use which may be made of the
information contained in this publication.

556

Citizenship Education in Society: CiCe Conference Papers 2007

The theoretical framework of the paper is Husserl’s notion of life world which is an
experience of intersubjectivity. Our methodology primarily involves sample interviews
and meeting reports with teachers at the primary and secondary schools and POST
Research Institute’s reports of Education for Peace I and II to see how micro-level
interactions can be used in peace education in Northern Cyprus.
Broadly, the paper examines peace education as a multi-dimensional phenomenon which
involves the interaction of life-worlds in the context of Northern Cyprus by using
phenomenology to analyse peace education in general.
Methodology of the research
As described above, the methodology has been divided into two parts:
a)

We use phenomenology to ‘understand’ the phenomena because how people create
their life worlds can be ‘interpreted’ through phenomenology. After all, each
individual ‘understands’ and ‘acts’ according to what s/he perceives in his/her life
world. Another theoretical framework of the paper is Husserl’s notion of empathy
which is an experience of intersubjectivity.

b) The meeting reports with school teachers and the reports of POST-RI will be used,
especially Education for Peace 1 and Education for Peace 2 to show the situation of
education and peace education in Northern Cyprus.
What is phenomenology and how it can contribute to peace education?
According to Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy (2003),
Literally, phenomenology is the study of "phenomena": appearances of things, or
things as they appear in our experience, or the ways we experience things, thus the
meanings things have in our experience. Phenomenology studies conscious
experience as experienced from the subjective or first person point of view.
As it can be seen from the definition, phenomenology can be used in peace education to
understand how people perceive the notion of peace education and how ‘we’, the writers
of this essay, ‘perceive and understand’ the phenomena. In other words, if individuals
are the actors and they create their life worlds based on the notion of their experiences
from the ‘first point of view’, then phenomenology can be a useful method to see the
dynamics of peace education in the society that we live in.
How does an individual constitute the world? This is one of the fundamental questions
for Husserl in ‘The Crisis of European Sciences – Part Two’. According to Husserl,
For the life-world – the “world for us all” – is identical with the identical that can
be commonly talked about. Every new apperception leads essentially, through
apperceptive transference, to a new typification of the surrounding world and in
social intercourse to a naming which immediately flows into the common

Karahasan: Peace Education in Northern Cyprus: A Phenomenological Approach

557

language. Thus the world is always such that it can be empirically, generally
(intersubjectively) explicated and, at the same time, linguistically explicated.
What Husserl mentions here is the significance of an individual’s perception and the
meaning that s/he interprets through social interaction. Language, for Husserl, is used as
a medium that transfers the individual’s experience that constitutes his/her life-world.
Another significant method that can be used when one talks about Husserl and peace
education could be his notion of empathy. For Husserl, ‘…through the medium of
empathy I can make use of the self-apperceptions others’. Regarding this, then, empathy
can be used as a tool to ‘understand’ how others feel and think. Empathy can be used in
peace education to ‘make use of the self-apperceptions of others (i.e., Greek Cypriots).
Again, referring Husserl,
What is directly and actually perceived (and it is even thought to be perceived with
a particular sort of apodictic self-evidence) is the presence-sphere of the psychic
experiences of one man, and only by that man himself, as his sinner perception; the
experiences of others are given only through the mediated type of experience
called “empathy” – unless this latter type of experience is reinterpreted as an
inference, as it generally used to be.
The psychic experience that one interprets can be used in a positive way in peace
education. For example, in issues like war and conflict, instead of just seeing the other as
an ‘eternal enemy’, empathy can be used to see that the problem(s) can have multiple
dimensions, and other people are also people like ‘us’. In other words, empathy could be
useful to see that ‘they (i.e., Greek Cypriots) had [have] the same needs that we had
[have]: food, shelter, living in safety on their land.’ (Zembylas and Karahasan, 2006, p.
18).
Peace education: Towards a critique?
If people create their life worlds through what they perceive and respond to it
accordingly, then, one can ask, what is the use of peace education and how can we
promote it?
A little survey on peace education shows that there are different answers for this
question (AKTI 2004; Bekerman 2002; Bekerman 2005; POST-RI 2004; POST-RI
2007; Theodossopoulos 2006; Zembylas & Karahasan 2006). Most research studies have
focused on the curricula development or revising textbooks, however, the point that this
paper touches on is the issue of how peace education can be promoted in Cyprus,
although there is no settlement. We think that changing the history books alone will not
be useful unless we consider that it is the ‘Individuals [who] are both objects and
subjects within networks of communicative interaction’. For example, Ziv (2005) argues
that ‘Good texts are important; but it is impossible to reach the aim [peace education]
without considering teachers’ (p.150).

558

Citizenship Education in Society: CiCe Conference Papers 2007

Also, as Bekerman (2005) claims,
Given the above and while recognising the profound influence of parents (and
social contexts at large) on children’s perspectives, I have come to question why it
is that educational institutions in general pay so little attention to parents, and that
integrated educational initiatives act so similarly. Clearly, the need to pay attention
to parental influences is not foreign to education, though for the most part it goes
unheeded. But in the case of our schools and in spite of their efforts to take parents
into account, this effort seems not to work sufficiently well so as to influence the
educational scene (p. 238).
Bekerman’s (2005) point is a significant one because the example of the bi-lingual
school in Israel shows us that although Israeli and Palestinian children go to the same
school and read the same books (one in Hebrew the other one in Arabic), still this does
not change the fact that children have the ‘same stereotypes’ toward each other.
All seemed to be convinced that, in order for the effort to be worthwhile and
successful, it needed to demonstrate its commitment to both ethnic pride and
separateness in addition to coexistence. In a sense, the children where just
mirroring teachers’ and parents’ views. It is when considering the above that I
come to question whether there are children to educate, or is it the adults and their
associative institutions who are the ones in need of education. Needless to say, the
assumption that a commitment to separate identities and the conceptualization of
identity as reified conditions of “self” are far from having been demonstrated as
supportive of tolerance and recognition (Bekerman, 2005, pp. 239-240).
The findings of Bekerman (2005), then, clearly show us that if we only think of peace
education as revising textbooks and the curricula without considering the individuals
who live outside the schools (such as parents, friends etc.), then, we come to the
conclusion that ‘…I question whether peace education, traditionally conceptualised as
cognitive development and offered in an isolated context, can achieve such goals?’
(Bekerman, 2005, p. 236).
The point of Bekerman (2005) is clear: in order to promote peace education, we should
encourage peace and reconciliation on a micro level, because daily interactions can
change the whole structure, of course not completely but on an individual level.
Otherwise, peace education may not work but helps the maintenance of the status quo
(Bekerman 2005). In order to promote peace education, it will not be useful if we only
revise the textbooks that are being taught but also we need each and every individual to
understand and promote peace education. In North Cyprus, revision of textbooks
actually shows how a revision could be based on a grass roots level (POST-RI 2007). As
indicated in POST-RI’s (2007) Education for Peace II, ‘the dynamics of change’ in the
Turkish Cypriot society actually caused the revision of the history textbooks in
secondary schools because Teacher’s Trade Unions (KTÖS, KTOEÖS), from the very
beginning are very much positive towards peace/settlement in Cyprus. Also, as indicated
in the Education for Peace I (POST-RI 2004), although textbooks contained many
nationalistic themes and elements, the relative autonomy of teachers meant that students
do not ‘learn’ things in a very nationalistic way. For example, some teachers’ refusal to

Karahasan: Peace Education in Northern Cyprus: A Phenomenological Approach

559

post the posters that have blood or violent scenes can be given as an example of that,
although these posters were sent by the Ministry of Education and Culture. Even this can
be seen as how an ‘individual could be both object and subject within the network of
communicative interaction’ as Georg Simmel claims. It also shows another fact:
although textbooks contained nationalistic elements and themes that promoted mutual
distrust between the two major communities (T/Cs & G/Cs), the relative autonomy of
teachers minimised, and sometimes diminished these problems (POST-RI 2004). The
findings of POST-RI (2004; 2007) are very important in the way that it documents how
even one individual can promote peace education although the educational system and
textbooks contained nationalistic elements and themes.
Nonetheless, as POST-RI (2007) shows in Education for Peace II, just revising the
textbooks does not mean that you can reach the aim that the educators/politicians
expected.
A common remark made by teachers concerned the lack of time allocated to the
teaching of Cyprus History (only 40 minutes a week). Therefore, although the
revised textbooks contain many useful teaching tools and exercises, due to time
constraints they are not being used to their full capacity… Moreover, the teachers
did not receive training in light of the revised textbooks and no teaching manual
was provided to schools. Although the revised textbooks are more student centred
in their approach the teachers lack the skills and knowledge to work provide such
teaching (POST-RI, 2007).
Thus, we can say that changing textbooks does not mean that you can change the whole
structure. Instead, there are other elements, such as training teachers, parents, educators,
students etc. that are important in promoting peace education in society.
Also, Bekerman (2005) points out that:
It is from this perspective that I claim that there are no children to educate towards
peace, and that institutionalised schooling might not be the way to achieve this
goal. The child is not the father of man but is authored by her, at least at first, and
thus adults are the ones needing to be educated for peace (and this outside the spell
of modernist perspectives). Integrated schools shaped in modern narratives are
prone to become forgetful of these facts and, in line with the nation state
hegemony, put an emphasis on reforming children while disregarding the wider
social context. When doing so, they fall pray to the nation state hegemonic power
and collaborate in securing a state of continuing conflict. If the integrated schools
want to contribute to peace education, they should seriously consider the one thing
which schools have historically denied, that is the necessary and intimate
connections between education (in school) and society (outside) as well as the
relationship between contexts of learning and contexts of “real” life (p. 241).
Conclusion
In conclusion, this paper analysed peace education from a phenomenological point of
view and argued that in order to promote peace education it is significant to understand

560

Citizenship Education in Society: CiCe Conference Papers 2007

the dynamics of daily face-to-face interactions of people. Phenomenology is used to
show how individuals create their life worlds; through senses, hence interpreting and
understanding phenomena according to Husserl.
The paper, then, talked about how we can promote peace education in North Cyprus.
One of the conclusions that we ended up with can be summarised as it is through the
daily interactions – for example, educating the father of the child but not the child as
Bekerman (2005) argues. Another thing is the fact that empathy can be used as a useful
way to ‘understand’ what the other thinks to a certain event.
To conclude, we would like to end our paper by re-stating Bekerman’s argument and say
how peace education can achieve its goals such as peace, reconciliation, tolerance and
recognition of others just by emphasising or revising the curricula but not the people
who make the whole system.

References
Bekerman, Z. (2005) Are there children to educate for peace in conflict-ridden areas? A
critical essay on peace and coexistence education. Intercultural Education,
Vol. 16, No. 3, August 2005, pp. 235–245.
Husserl, E. The crisis of European sciences – Part two. http://www.evansexperientalism.freewebspace.com/husserl02.htm. Retrieved from the World Wide
Web, 21 March 2007.
POST Research Institute (2004) Education for Peace: Pilot Application for the History
and Literature Books of the 5th Grade of the Elementary School. Nicosia, POST-RI.
POST Research Institute (2007) Project on education for peace II: Textual and visual
analysis of the lower secondary school history textbooks – Comparative analysis of
the old and the new history textbooks. Nicosia, POST-RI.
Stanford
Encyclopaedia
of
Philosophy
(2003)
Phenomenology.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/phenomenology. Retrieved from the World Wide
Web, 11 April 2007.
Theodossopoulos, D. (2006) ‘Introduction: The “Turks” in the Imagination of the
“Greeks”’, South European Society and Politics, Vol. 11, pp. 1-32.
Zembylas, M. & Karahasan, H (2006) The politics of memory and forgetting in
pedagogical practices: Towards pedagogies of reconciliation and peace in divided
Cyprus. The Cyprus Review Vol. 18: 2, Fall 2006.
Ziv, H. G., (2005) Eleştirel Pedagoji, İnsan Hakları Eğitimi İçin Pedagoji [Critical
pedagogy, pedagogy for human rights education]. Nasıl eğitiliyoruz? İnsan hakları
eğitimi ve ders kitabı araştırmaları uluslararası sempozyum bildirileri [How are we
educated? Interantional symposium on human rights education and textbook
research]. Istanbul: Tarih Vakfı Yayınları, 2005, pp. 144-150.

