International Peace Academy
I n t e r n a t io n a l

Post-Conflict Peacebuilding
Revisited:
Achievements, Limitations,
Challenges

Neclâ Tschirgi

Prepared for the WSP International/IPA Peacebuilding Forum
Conference
7 OCTOBER 2004 ■ NEW YORK

Acknowledgements
The IPA Security-Development Program gratefully acknowledges support from the Rockefeller Foundation,
the governments of Australia, Canada (DFAIT and CIDA), Germany, Luxembourg, Norway, and the United
Kingdom (DfID). The Program also greatly benefits from core support to IPA from the governments of
Denmark, Sweden, and Switzerland, as well as the Ford Foundation and the William and Flora Hewlett
Foundation.
WSP International would like to thank all those who contributed to the Peacebuilding Forum process, and
expresses special gratitude for the generous financial support of Canada, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
the Rockefeller Foundation, and the International Development Research Centre (Canada).

About the Author
Dr. Necla Tschirgi is Vice President of IPA and Director of the Security-Development Program. Previously she
was the Team Leader of the Peacebuilding and Reconstruction Initiative at the International Development
Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada, where she was actively involved in the design and management of
research projects on peacebuilding in the Middle East, Central America, and Southern Africa.

About the Programs
IPA’s Security-Development Nexus Program aims to contribute to a better understanding of the linkages
between security and development strategies in conflict management. Through its research projects,
conferences and publications, the program seeks to make concrete recommendations to the UN system and
the broader international community for more effective strategies, policies and programs in achieving
sustainable peace and development.
WSP International (formerly the War-torn Societies Project) contributes to the recovery and strengthening
of societies emerging from conflict by bringing together a diverse group of local actors to set priorities,
build consensus and formulate responses to the needs identified, underpinned by participatory action
research. This process is supported by bilateral and multilateral agencies.
The Peacebuilding Forum is a year-long process initiated by WSP International which examines the critical
relationship between internal and external actors as they respond to the challenges of consolidating peace
and rebuilding in countries after war. Experience has shown that sustainable peace requires the legitimacy
that only local responsibility and ownership can bring. The recommendations put forward by the Forum thus
seek to define a better balance between external partnerships and national ownership of peacebuilding
strategies and activities.

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Contents
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i
I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

II. The Emergence of Peacebuilding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
III. Normative Underpinnings of Peacebuilding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
IV. International Responses to Peacebuilding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Institutional Innovations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Policy Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Resource Mobilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
V. Operational Principles of Post-Conflict Peacebuilding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
VI. From Practice to Results: Reviewing the Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Evaluating Peacebuilding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Research Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
VII. Challenges to Effective Post-Conflict Peacebuilding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Systemic and Structural Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Policy Orthodoxy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Policy Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
VIII.

Challenges to Consolidating Post-Conflict Peacebuilding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

IX. Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Endnotes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Selected Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Contents

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

sources of violent conflicts in conflict-torn
societies while preparing the grounds for sustainable peace and development. Grounded in “liberal
internationalism,” peacebuilding was seen as going
beyond state centric conceptions of realpolitik or
the interests of any single country, bloc or entity
even though national interests of member states
inevitably influenced the nature of the international response.

Executive Summary
•

A full decade after it became a high-profile
international commitment, post-conflict peacebuilding remains a fragile undertaking with mixed
results. While there is little doubt that
peacebuilding will continue to require international attention, the lessons of the last ten years do
not add up to a successful record.

•

Along with preventive diplomacy, peacemaking
and peacekeeping, peacebuilding was identified as
one of a series of instruments in the UN’s toolkit to
respond to conflicts at the end of the Cold War.
Originally, peacebuilding referred to action to
identify and support structures to consolidate
peace in post-conflict countries in order to avoid a
relapse into conflict. In the 1990s the concept
became more expansive, combining conflict
prevention, conflict management and post-conflict
reconstruction. Today, peacebuilding is no longer
an exact term; it often needs the qualifier “postconflict” peacebuilding to refer primarily to the
non-military or civilian dimensions of international efforts to support countries emerging from
conflict—even though it might accompany or
succeed military operations. Despite over ten years
of practice, there is no commonly agreed postconflict peacebuilding policy or doctrine.

•

•

Many international actors responded to the
challenges of post-conflict peacebuilding by
creating designated units, new policy instruments
and special funding mechanisms. While these
innovations were important, they did not translate
into significant policy changes, institutional
reforms or funding arrangements. Even though
many agencies within the UN system and in donor
governments are now involved in post-conflict
activities, peacebuilding remains an institutional
orphan without a home. It straddles different
departments, agencies and units.
During the 1990s, peacebuilding was seen as an
international necessity and responsibility. It
represented a collective commitment by the United
Nations and other international actors to redress

Executive Summary

•

In the course of its implementation, post-conflict
peacebuilding ran into multiple political, institutional and operational challenges. Many of these
were a function of the difficulties of rebuilding
societies torn apart by war. Others derived from the
built-in limitations, contradictions, shortcomings
and failures of international policies and institutions. Nonetheless, international peacebuilding
expanded in significant ways. There is a growing
body of knowledge about its basic principles and
operational prerequisites. There even is an impressive catalogue of lessons learned (as well as lessons
spurned). Yet the results of over ten years of
peacebuilding policy and practice have been ad
hoc, tentative and uneven.

•

One of the persistent obstacles to more effective
peacebuilding outcomes is the chronic inability of
international actors to adapt their assistance to the
political dynamics of the war-torn societies they
seek to support. The internal-external disconnect
manifests itself at the conceptual, policy,
operational and institutional levels. Unless significant modifications are made to the existing models
of collaboration between internal and external
actors by addressing the politics of peacebuilding,
international efforts will continue to fall short of
their declared goals of enabling war-torn societies
to get on the path to sustainable peace and
development.

•

More fundamentally, the favorable international
environment within which peacebuilding
flourished in the 1990s has changed dramatically
after 9/11 and the military interventions in
Afghanistan and Iraq. The post–Cold War international consensus has largely dissipated—leaving in

i

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

its place a deeply divided international community
which does not have the appropriate institutions or
the necessary political will to forge a new
consensus about international priorities. It is
increasingly recognized that An Agenda for Peace,
An Agenda for Development and the Millennium
Development Goals (which collectively defined the
aspirations of the post–Cold War international
community) no longer remain at the nucleus of the
UN system. The UN itself falls short of representing
the collective will of the international community.
•

Since 9/11, peacebuilding has increasingly been
taken over by a new discourse on “nationbuilding,” “regime change,” and “stabilization and
reconstruction,” which is predicated on the
necessity of securing the stability of weak or
failing states to avoid the negative external fallout from state failure. Such a formulation, driven
primarily by external concerns, is likely to
undermine the basic premise of peacebuilding that
peace, security and stability cannot be imposed
from the outside but need to be nurtured internally
through patient, flexible, responsive strategies that
are in tune with domestic political realities.

•

The persistence of intra-state and civil conflicts in
different regions, the breakdown of peace
processes, the relapse of a number of countries into
violent conflict, and the emergence of new

ii

conflicts ensure that the demand for post-conflict
peacebuilding will continue unabated in the
coming years and decades—despite its multiple
shortcomings and weaknesses. As an organization
of member states, the United Nations cannot afford
to ignore the national security interests of its
powerful member states which have come to the
forefront of the international agenda since 9/11.
Nor can it ignore its responsibility to the needs of
its most vulnerable members, including postconflict countries.
•

Great expectations are placed on the forthcoming
report of the High Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change which has been tasked by
the UN Secretary-General to propose ways of
enhancing multilateral efforts to address global
problems. It is anticipated that the Panel will urge
the UN to renew its commitment to conflict
prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding,
combining the UN’s twin agendas for peace and
development. If UN member states agree that
peacebuilding is too important an enterprise to
give up, they face a dual challenge. They need to
learn from and further improve upon the innovative but modest gains made to date. Equally
important, they need to resist the slippery slope of
allowing post-conflict peacebuilding to be replaced
by the post 9/11 stabilization agenda of certain
powerful states.

Executive Summary

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

I. Introduction
The Cartigny meeting of the War-torn Societies Project
(WSP) in late 1994 raised a question that had been
gaining attention since the end of the Cold War: How
can external actors, working collectively, best assist
countries emerging from violent conflict and war?
Throughout the Cold War, the United Nations and the
broader international community had confined their
efforts in conflict contexts primarily to humanitarian
relief, peacemaking and peacekeeping activities. They
were not prepared to deal with the multiple and
complex challenges of post-conflict reconstruction as
various violent conflicts wound down in the late 1980s
and early 1990s. Namibia, Nicaragua, Cambodia, El
Salvador, and Mozambique were harbingers of a new
era whereby external actors would be asked to play
active roles in assisting countries emerging from
conflict.
Participants to the Cartigny meeting identified a
catalogue of issues requiring serious attention and
pointed to the “dearth of data and research on the
whole peace-rehabilitation-development continuum.”1
A decade after the Cartigny meeting, post-conflict
peacebuilding has become an international growth
industry. More than a dozen international peace
operations have been mounted since Namibia. The
number and range of external actors involved in postconflict peacebuilding have increased manifold. The
literature on peacebuilding has grown exponentially.2
The field of post-conflict peacebuilding has come very
far both in theory and in practice in the last decade.
Yet the record of peacebuilding is at best mixed, and
two nagging questions confront analysts and practitioners alike: Why is it that after more than ten years
of practice, the international peacebuilding project is
still experimental, amorphous and tenuous in nature?
And how can the knowledge and experience gained to
date be better put to use to achieve more effective
peacebuilding outcomes?
This study is designed to address these questions at a
macro or systemic level as part of the Peacebuilding

Introduction

Forum launched by WSP International. Other studies
commissioned by the Peacebuilding Forum focus more
specifically on thematic or country-level answers. It is
hoped that, collectively, they will lead to a better
understanding of the persistent systemic, political,
institutional and operational obstacles that confront
post-conflict peacebuilding and suggest ways of
overcoming them.
The paper has two inter-related theses. The first is that
international peacebuilding has several inherent
weaknesses that do not lend themselves to easy
solutions. One of these, which also is the core concern
of the WSP International/IPA Peacebuilding Forum
Conference, is the perennial difficulty faced by
external actors in aligning their efforts and interests to
the domestic political realities of the war-torn societies
they seek to support. The second thesis is that while
peacebuilding policies and practices have advanced
significantly in the last decade, the environment within
which peacebuilding flourished in the 1990s has
dramatically changed after 9/11. Thus, the advances
that were achieved during a brief and experimental
decade did not have a chance to be consolidated
sufficiently before they were overtaken by other
international priorities.
As the paper demonstrates, addressing complex
political, institutional, policy or operational challenges
in an international environment favorable to postconflict peacebuilding is difficult enough. Addressing
them in an international environment characterized by
deep cleavages, lack of consensus on the threats to
international peace and security, and ongoing wars
involving major states presents overwhelming
challenges to the entire peacebuilding project. The
paper argues that there is considerable room for the
United Nations and the international community at
large to improve peacebuilding policy and practice.
However, it also warns that the post-conflict
peacebuilding project is at risk of being overtaken by
other agendas which have emerged in the post 9/11
environment, including the attempt to conflate
peacebuilding with the narrowly-cast national security
agendas of powerful member states.

1

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

II. The Emergence of Peacebuilding
The term peacebuilding entered the international
lexicon in 1992 when UN Secretary-General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali defined it in An Agenda for Peace as
post-conflict “action to identify and support structures
which tend to strengthen and solidify peace to avoid a
relapse into conflict.”3 Since then, peacebuilding has
become a catchall concept, encompassing multiple (and
at times contradictory) perspectives and agendas. It is
indiscriminately used to refer to preventive diplomacy,
preventive development, conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.4
This paper focuses on the original definition of
peacebuilding.5 More specifically, it examines nonmilitary interventions by external actors to help wartorn societies not only to avoid a relapse into conflict,
but more importantly, to establish the conditions for
sustainable peace. The time frame for the
peacebuilding interventions covered in this paper is
not confined to the immediate, short-term, postconflict peace operations to consolidate the peace or
the early reconstruction efforts of the early post-war
years. Rather, post-conflict peacebuilding encompasses
the full range of non-military commitments
undertaken by the international community to assist
countries to achieve self-sustaining peace and socioeconomic development. Despite its deliberate narrow
focus, the paper traces the gradual broadening of the
concept of peacebuilding by key international actors
and its implications for peacebuilding practice.6
While the term peacebuilding is relatively new,
external assistance for post-war rebuilding goes back
to the reconstruction of post–World War II Europe and
Japan. What was new in Boutros Boutros-Ghali's
formulation, and what caught the world's attention,
was a realization that the end of the Cold War opened
new possibilities for international action.7
Traditionally, states intervened in the affairs of other
states as part of their foreign policy. Where realpolitik
permitted, intervention was undisguised and forceful.
Where realpolitik blocked action, the United Nations
and other multilateral institutions were paralyzed to
act collectively.

2

The promise of the new peacebuilding agenda was that
the international community would intervene collectively—as a “third party”—to help resolve violent
conflicts and civil wars, and that external actors would
actively support the process of rebuilding in the
affected countries without the shadow of Cold War
politics or to suit the narrow national interests of
individual states. In other words, what was being
promised was unlike earlier generations of imperialist,
colonialist, or other self-serving external interventions
even though in an international system based on
states, it was recognized that state interests shaped
their international policies.
The impetus for peacebuilding came from multiple
sources but found its strongest expression at the United
Nations. Throughout the 1990s, the UN provided both
the rationale and the operational principles for postconflict peacebuilding.8 An Agenda for Peace
introduced post-conflict peacebuilding as one of a
series of tools at the UN's disposal alongside preventive
diplomacy,
peacemaking
and
peacekeeping.
Distinguishing between these tools, it stated:
“Peacemaking and peace-keeping operations, to be
truly successful, must come to include comprehensive
efforts to identify and support structures which will
tend to consolidate peace and advance a sense of
confidence and well-being among people. Through
agreements ending civil strife, these may include
disarming the previously warring parties and the
restoration of order, the custody and possible destruction of weapons, repatriating refugees, advisory and
training support for security personnel, monitoring
elections, advancing efforts to protect human rights,
reforming or strengthening governmental institutions
and promoting formal and informal processes of
political participation.”9
An Agenda for Peace stimulated significant new
thinking and policy development within and outside
the UN. The 1995 Supplement to An Agenda for Peace,
for example, noted the linkages between conflict
prevention and peacebuilding: “Demilitarization, the
control of small arms, institutional reform, improved
police and judicial systems, the monitoring of human
rights, electoral reform and social and economic
development can be as valuable in preventing conflict

The Emergence of Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

as in healing the wounds after conflict has occurred.”
It also acknowledged that implementing peacebuilding
could be complicated—requiring “integrated action and
delicate dealings between the United Nations and the
parties to the conflict in respect of which peacebuilding activities are to be undertaken.”10
The Supplement distinguished between the UN's
peacekeeping and peacebuilding roles: “Most of the
activities that together constitute peace-building fall
within the mandates of the various programmes, funds,
offices and agencies of the United Nations system with
responsibilities in the economic, social, humanitarian
and human rights fields. In a country ruined by war,
resumption of such activities may initially have to be
entrusted to, or at least coordinated by, a multifunctional peace-keeping operation, but as that operation
succeeds in restoring normal conditions, the
programmes, funds, offices and agencies can reestablish themselves and gradually take over responsibility from the peace-keepers, with the resident coordinator in due course assuming the coordination
functions temporarily entrusted to the special representative of the Secretary-General.” 11
An Agenda for Peace, its Supplement, and An Agenda
for Development informed the UN's approach to
peacebuilding throughout the 1990s. However, practice
quickly outpaced policy. For much of the 1990s, the UN
responded to peacebuilding primarily as an extension
of its peacekeeping operations as many UN programs
and agencies became involved in a variety of civilian
activities. After 1989, there were more than a dozen UN
peace operations with civilian components. In the
complex conflicts of the 1990s where the boundaries
between war making and peace making were blurred,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding became closely
interlinked.12
By August 2000, the Report of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations (otherwise known as the
Brahimi Report) fully acknowledged these linkages.
Accordingly, the Panel recommended various specific
peacebuilding tools and strategies in peace operations,
including the adoption of quick impact projects (QIPs),
the creation of a fund for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR), the adoption of a “doctrinal

The Emergence of Peacebuilding

shift” away from international civilian policing to “rule
of law teams” in complex peace operations, the
establishment of a pilot Peacebuilding Unit, and
regularized funding for the Electoral Affairs Division. 13
In calling for an action plan to implement the Brahimi
Report, Secretary-General Kofi Annan urged better
synchronization of effort: “The plan must help to
identify the ways in which different parts of the system
might properly work together to devise countryspecific peace-building strategies and to implement
them together, in the context of the country team.
Arrangements for peacebuilding must be coherent,
flexible and field-driven, mobilizing all relevant
resources of the United Nations system and other
international actors in support of national initiatives,
and building or reorienting ongoing activities so that
they contribute to peace. What is required is a
headquarters capacity to provide those resources
necessary for the country team to propose specific
strategies and see them through. This capacity must
help to identify best practices and lessons to be learned
from within the system, provide knowledge of discussions and debates on peace-building from external
institutions and organizations and formulate systemwide guidelines and generic methodologies.”14
As the number of crises on the Security Council's
agenda increased, the Council as well as the SecretaryGeneral began to acknowledge the limitations of UN
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. As a result,
they began to turn to conflict prevention to complement the UN's broader peacebuilding agenda. By early
2001, conflict prevention and peacebuilding were
being used interchangeably at the UN.15
In short, between 1992–2001, the UN moved from a
linear view of the transition from war to peace in the
post–Cold War era to an integrated approach to
conflict prevention, conflict management, and
peacebuilding. It came to view peacebuilding as
requiring the full range of its capacities (military,
political, humanitarian, human rights, and socioeconomic) at the policy and operational levels. The UN
also realized that peacebuilding involved the active
engagement of many external actors with multiple
mandates and capacities. As the Security Council

3

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

gradually assumed an expanded role beyond
immediate crisis management, the UN's peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions became increasingly
intertwined.16 As Sir Brian Urquhart recently noted: “In
the twentieth century war was pronounced, belatedly,
to be too important to be left to the generals; in the
twenty-first century peace, prosperity, and security
have already turned out to be much too complex to be
left to the politicians. In a dangerous, high-speed,
information-logged, globalized world, disastrously
divided between the prosperous and the impoverished,
the old distinctions between war and peace, civil and
military, national and international, private and public,
have become increasingly blurred.”17 Peacebuilding
came to capture the complexity and multi-dimensional
nature of the challenges facing the United Nations.

III. Normative Underpinnings of
Peacebuilding
Peacebuilding was part of a larger, activist post–Cold
War international agenda.18 Throughout the 1990s,
there was a gradual elaboration of an expanded
normative framework for international affairs under
the UN umbrella. In the early part of the decade, a
series of international conferences sought to generate a
global agenda on issues ranging from population and
sustainable development to human rights and gender.
These conferences served to underline the importance
of multilateral approaches to addressing global
problems and affirmed the role of the United Nations
as an important instrument of global governance. The
Millennium Declaration was a culmination of these
processes and provided a global plan of action to deal
with the world's most persistent problems.19
Meanwhile, the Security Council saw an expansion of
the issues brought before it as threats to international
peace and security. These included human rights
abuses, protection of civilians in war, small arms, and
the role of natural resources in armed conflict—issues
that had traditionally been viewed as falling within the
sovereign domain of member states. Breaking away
from its tradition of dealing with individual crises, the
Council passed a number of thematic resolutions on
human rights, small arms, and children and armed

4

conflict. Subsequent Council resolutions were drafted
to take into account these international commitments.
In line with its new interest in human security, the
Security Council devoted an increasing proportion of
its work to crises in Africa.20
In tandem with developments at the United Nations,
several governmental and non-governmental actors
championed various issues that came to be subsumed
under the new “human security” agenda. The
campaigns to ban anti-personnel landmines, to
regulate small arms and light weapons, and to establish
an international criminal court were part of the
emerging international commitment to human
security. The landmines campaign and the call for an
international criminal court led to new international
treaties.
Alongside these advances, the 1990s witnessed intense
(albeit localized) conflicts and humanitarian crises
which led to growing international appeals for
“humanitarian intervention” in sovereign states,
causing considerable unease among the UN's member
states. Although the United Nations refrained from
dealing with it formally, the report published by the
independent International Commission on Intervention
and State Sovereignty (ICISS) entitled Responsibility to
Protect was ground breaking in offering a normative
framework for humanitarian interventions. 21
The injunction against intervention in the domestic
affairs of sovereign states came under even greater
pressure as conflict prevention emerged as a new
international priority. Collectively, conflict prevention,
humanitarian interventions, and post-conflict
peacebuilding became parts of an activist international
agenda. Over the course of the 1990s, the conflict
prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding agendas
came to be seen as two sides of the same coin,
especially in countries that had already experienced
conflict. Given the exceptionally high rate of recidivism of countries that had experienced conflict, postconflict peacebuilding became a strategy for conflict
prevention.
It was argued that fundamental “re-engineering” of
conflict prone societies was essential to prevent their

Normative Underpinnings of Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

relapse into conflict. External actors began to develop
a peacebuilding template and a package of standard
remedies to be applied in different contexts. Security
needed to be established through disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
as well as through security sector reform. Political
consolidation required national dialogues, early
elections, the expansion of political rights, and the
establishment of rule of law. Economic reconstruction
involved reforms for speedy recovery and rehabilitation. International strategies for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding increasingly converged, becoming
part of what has come to be known as “liberal internationalism.”22
The international approach to peacebuilding and
conflict prevention is grounded in the concept of
“liberal peace” which derives from a long tradition of
Western liberal theory and practice.23 The liberal peace
thesis views political and economic liberalization as
effective antidotes to violent conflicts. Thus, promotion
of human rights, democracy, elections, constitutionalism, rule of law, property rights, good governance,
and neo-liberal economics have become part and
parcel of the international peacebuilding strategy.24
Liberal internationalism is interventionist in nature.
Going beyond assisting individual countries emerging
from war, it promotes a normative agenda. This, of
course, stands in stark contrast with the widely
declared principle that peacebuilding ultimately
requires the establishment of a non-violent political
authority which can legitimately guide a country's
post-conflict reconstruction on its own terms. The
shortcomings of international peacebuilding will be
discussed in Section VII. Nonetheless, it needs to be
recognized that this normative framework has firmly
underpinned peacebuilding practice since the 1990s.

IV. International Responses to
Peacebuilding
In the last decade, many external actors became
actively involved in post-conflict peacebuilding. The
following review will focus on approaches by governments and inter-governmental actors to underscore the
highly political nature of peacebuilding interventions.

International Approaches to Peacebuilding

In any society emerging from conflict, the establishment of a legitimate political authority that can
provide security, avoid a relapse into violent conflict
and undertake longer-term socio-economic reconstruction efforts lies at the heart of peacebuilding. Other
initiatives at the societal or micro-level are important
components that can complement but not substitute
for the need for a political strategy for peacebuilding
on the part of external actors.25
Yet, the picture of international peacebuilding strategies pursued throughout the 1990s is one of ad hoc,
piecemeal, and fragmented responses by a multitude of
actors without an overall political framework or an
institutional base. Many crises in the last decade
involved combined humanitarian, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. While humanitarian and
peacekeeping efforts had institutional homes,
peacebuilding was (and still remains) an institutional
orphan.26 Straddling the various political, military and
development agencies and departments in international organizations and donor governments,
peacebuilding found temporary and tenuous shelter
under the roof of development agencies.27
Given the great variation in the approaches of different
governments and international organizations, it is
difficult to provide a comprehensive and accurate
picture of the evolution of international peacebuilding
policy and practice across the full spectrum of bilateral
and multilateral donor agencies involved in postconflict peacebuilding. The discussion below briefly
highlights three important areas that illustrate external
responses to peacebuilding: institutional innovations,
policy development, and resource mobilization.
Institutional Innovations
In the early 1990s, post-conflict reconstruction was
seen as a temporary stage in the unilinear transition
from war to peace and considered as part of the “reliefto-development” continuum. Thus, the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of war-torn societies became a subspecialty within the broader development agenda.28 The
expectation was that international responses to
conflicts would be sequential in nature, with various
actors playing different roles in assisting in the transi-

5

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

tion from war to peace. The special needs of societies
emerging from conflict were seen to require hybrid
approaches drawn from the flexible, rapid and responsive strategies of humanitarian operations, and the
long-term vision of development assistance. As then
Vice President of External Affairs of the World Bank
(and current administrator of UNDP) Mark Malloch
Brown indicated: “Post-conflict development is
something that defies the exact boundaries of
traditional forms of assistance: it is neither sustainable
development nor is it humanitarian response.”29

Peacebuilding Initiative in October 1996, which
defined peacebuilding as a short-term activity, “a lifeline” thrown to countries emerging from conflict. As a
result, a Peacebuilding Fund was created (to be jointly
managed by the Department of Foreign Affairs and the
Canadian aid agency, CIDA) to serve as a catalyst to
stimulate local sustainable initiatives toward peace
while strengthening Canadian capacities to support
peacebuilding. CIDA created its Peacebuilding Unit
with its counterpart Peacebuilding Program in the
Department of Foreign Affairs.

Viewing peacebuilding as a temporary phase, development agencies initially responded by creating specialized and designated units to address the institutional
and programming void between humanitarian
assistance and development aid.30 These units had
narrowly defined responsibilities and designated
budgets to address immediate and short-term priorities.
Nonetheless, they were instrumental in designing and
implementing new “peacebuilding” programs, projects
and activities that fell outside conventional humanitarian or development assistance. De-mining, DDR,
election monitoring, and civilian policing became new
areas of programming for development actors.

In the Netherlands, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs took
the lead on peacebuilding through its Directorate of
Crisis Management and Humanitarian Assistance
(DCH), which was established in 1996. DCH sought to
dismantle the compartmentalization of emergency
relief and the political aspects of crisis management,
and to integrate various policy options—political,
humanitarian, developmental, economic, and military—
into a coherent response to crises, potential violent
conflicts and post-conflict peacebuilding. To ensure
such integration, the Directorate reported to both the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister for
Development Cooperation.

For example, USAID created the Office of Transition
Initiatives (OTI) in 1994. The mandate of OTI was to
support the triple transitions from authoritarianism to
democracy, from violent conflict to peace and from
political crisis to stability. It sought to serve as a
catalyst for political change by seizing on windows of
opportunity to shape conditions on the ground.
Similarly, in the UK the Department for International
Development (DFID) created the Conflict and Human
Affairs Department (CHAD) in 1997 to help reduce the
incidence and impact of violent conflicts and to
promote effective responses for conflict prevention,
conflict management, and humanitarian assistance.
CHAD was mandated with developing policy and
providing advice and support in non-conventional
areas for development assistance.

In tandem with changes in donor capitals, intergovernmental organizations responded to the
challenge of post-conflict peacebuilding by seeking
new directions from their governing boards to initiate
new programming and create designated units. In
1995, UNDP established its Emergency Response
Division (ERD) and allocated five percent of its core
budget to assist countries in special development
situations. The World Bank created its Post-Conflict
Unit in July 1997. In other words, there was a gradual
recognition that post-conflict peacebuilding required
special attention within conventional development
agencies with primary responsibility for socioeconomic development, but without the expertise or
mandates for the critical political and security
dimensions of peacebuilding.

Several smaller countries also played an important role
in pioneering novel institutional and policy initiatives.
For example, in Canada, Foreign Minister Lloyd
Axworthy and Diane Marleau, Minister for
International Cooperation, announced the Canadian

Confined largely to small, designated units and an
equally small cadre of dedicated staff, peacebuilding
basically remained outside the mainstream of the
operations of development agencies. Despite repeated
commitments to “mainstreaming” peacebuilding,

6

International Approaches to Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

development agencies found it difficult to integrate
peacebuilding into their core mandates. While many
agencies gained a better understanding of the
challenges of post-conflict peacebuilding, their
capacity to translate those into their operations were
severely constrained by institutional politics, human
resource shortages, and competing priorities.
Inconsistent policy directions at the governmental
level also constrained the role of post-conflict
peacebuilding units.
Policy Development
Creating designated units with special mandates for
conflict management enabled governments and
agencies to respond to immediate needs for transitional
assistance. But these ad hoc responses could not serve
as a substitute for clear policy development which
required multi-dimensional responses.
Mirroring the policy evolution at the United Nations,
throughout the 1990s, many governments expanded
their definition of peacebuilding in light of domestic
policy imperatives, institutional considerations, and
the complexity of conflict dynamics on the ground.
Conflict management, conflict prevention and postconflict peacebuilding gradually became interchangeable policy priorities. The merging of multiple agendas
greatly militated against clear policy formulation. As a
result, despite over ten years of practice in working in
post-conflict countries, governments that are actively
engaged in peacebuilding still do not have clear,
consistent, and well-articulated policies on postconflict peacebuilding. Instead, there are general calls
for “policy coherence” across issue areas, pleas for
“whole-of-government” approaches, and increased
mechanisms for policy coordination. These, however,
do not add up to a strategic peacebuilding doctrine or
policy framework.
For example, the recently completed Utstein Evaluation
Study of Peacebuilding by Norway, the Netherlands,
Germany and the UK (which constitute the Utstein-4
countries) offers the following conclusion:
“Apart from the shared goals, two common strands
emerge from the summaries of policy evolution [in
the four countries]… The first is that no U4 country

International Approaches to Peacebuilding

has what any of the research teams was prepared
to characterize without reservation as ‘a policy' on
peacebuilding—in three cases the policies were
deduced from a variety of sources, and in the
fourth a policy (or a strategy) is in draft form. The
second is that in the U4 as in other donor
countries, a major role in peacebuilding is played
by the part of the government responsible for
development cooperation.” 31
Despite the lack of a clear peacebuilding policy or
doctrine, donor governments undertook many initiatives both individually and collectively throughout the
1990s. The OECD Development Assistance Committee
(OECD DAC) played a critical role in documenting
individual donor innovations and spearheaded collective responses.32 The DAC considered the issue of
conflict, peace and development cooperation at a High
Level Meeting in May 1995, which set up the Informal
DAC Task Force on Conflict, Peace and Development
Co-operation. The Task Force completed its Guidelines
on Conflict, Peace and Development Co-operation in
1997. The Guidelines offered a useful conceptual
framework for donors' work on conflict, and offered
practical and operational approaches to development
cooperation in conflict situations. However, reflecting
policy challenges in capitals, the OECD DAC situated
post-conflict peacebuilding within a larger policy
framework linking conflict and development. The DAC
Guidelines were elaborated in 2001 to address conflict
prevention and today constitute a robust and comprehensive framework for donor approaches to conflict.33
Perhaps the most significant contribution of the
Guidelines to peacebuilding doctrine is its emphasis on
the need for coherence across donor policies, including
trade, finance, investments, foreign affairs, defense and
development cooperation.
Paralleling the work of the OECD DAC, a network of the
conflict, transition and emergency units of multilateral
and bilateral organizations has been in existence since
1997. Bringing together more than thirty units with
operational
responsibilities
for
post-conflict
peacebuilding, the Conflict Prevention and PostConflict Reconstruction (CPR) Network has sought to
strengthen peacebuilding practice and inter-agency
collaboration in applying the DAC guidelines. However,
as its name indicates, the group also had to extend its

7

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

mandate to include conflict prevention in line with
changing policy priorities. The CPR Donors' Network
has served to promote operational coordination,
knowledge-sharing, improved effectiveness and
innovation of CPR programming, the development of
practical tools and lessons learned as well as their
application in the field. 34

Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Program in
the Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs and
Canadian CIDA respectively. Still other governments,
like the UK, pooled resources from across government
departments for the expanded peacebuilding agenda.
More recently, individual governments have been
receptive to pooling their resources for post-conflict
reconstruction under Trust Funds. 38

Resource Mobilization
One of the important yardsticks for gauging the
international
commitment
to
post-conflict
peacebuilding is the scale of financial resources
mobilized across agencies, governments and international organizations. Paradoxically, in an area where
quantification is technically possible, there is insufficient and highly fragmented information about the
total costs of post-conflict peacebuilding in the last
decade. Part of the difficulty derives from the fact that
governments and agencies define peacebuilding differently. Moreover, with multiple departments and
agencies involved in post-conflict peacebuilding, it is
difficult to reconstruct the aggregate financial burdens
of peacebuilding. On the other hand, in integrated
peacekeeping-peacebuilding missions where more
accurate figures are available, disaggregating between
military and civilian costs of international assistance
has proved to be problematic.35
One rough method of calculating total expenditures on
peacebuilding would be to tally up the cost of
designated peacebuilding projects as a portion of
development assistance in specific countries. Indeed,
the Utstein Evaluation Studies attempt to trace
financial allocations for peacebuilding. Even then,
definitional issues militate against gaining an accurate
understanding of financial commitments at the level of
the donor or the recipient countries.36 It is clear,
however, that there is a significant gap between policy
commitments, programming innovations and the
financial resources available for post-conflict
peacebuilding.37 Some governments (like Norway)
responded to this challenge by identifying resources
for transitional assistance beyond long-term development assistance and short-term humanitarian aid.
Other governments created special funding facilities.
These include the Office of Transition Initiative (OTI) at
USAID, the Stability Fund in the Netherlands, and the

8

Equally important has been the changing response of
the World Bank and the IMF to investing in postconflict reconstruction. Both the World Bank and IMF
were
reluctant
latecomers
to
post-conflict
peacebuilding. Ironically, the World Bank was initially
created in 1944 to serve as a bank for reconstruction.
Over time it defined its role primarily as a development
agency, even when it occasionally found itself working
in post-conflict countries, and undertook infrastructure
reconstruction projects. Clinging to its formal mandate
that precludes it from playing a “political” role, the
World Bank was hesitant to get involved in
peacebuilding. Nonetheless, the Bank could not remain
immune to the international peacebuilding agenda. The
Bank's lending in post-conflict countries rose significantly in the 1990s, providing support for the
provision of social safety nets, coordination of aid,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, mine clearance, reintegration of displaced
populations, and rehabilitation of infrastructure.39 In
July 1997, the Bank created a Post Conflict Unit.
Subsequently renamed the Conflict Prevention and
Reconstruction Unit, the CPR Unit has participated as
an observer on the DAC Task Force on Conflict, Peace
and Development and the CPR Network. The Bank has
also developed its own conflict analysis framework for
screening Bank projects, and has actively sought CPR
Network support to advance peacebuilding more
broadly in the Bank's economically inclined agenda.
The IMF was even more hesitant than the Bank in
getting involved in post-conflict reconstruction. Given
its fairly surgical and short-term interventions to
stabilize balance of payments problems, the IMF did
not consider itself well placed to engage in postconflict peacebuilding. However, in 1995 the IMF
introduced a new financing instrument for postconflict countries and has been providing technical
assistance through expertise and aid to its members in

International Approaches to Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

several areas, including institution building.40
Importantly, a representative from the IMF has
attended the DAC Task Force on Conflict, Peace and
Development and the CPR Network routinely and
actively engaged in its deliberations.41

actively be involved in setting the agenda and
leading the process, which is a highly political
process complicated by the deep wounds of the
conflict.
•

External Actors: Given the fragility of societies
emerging from war, support from external actors is
critical for post-conflict reconstruction. Yet,
external assistance is never neutral. External actors
come to post-conflict peacebuilding with multiple
agendas and motivations—which are not
necessarily compatible with or driven by the
political realities on the ground. Proper
mechanisms need to be established to ensure that
external and internal actors work within a
coherent strategy, establish priorities, and mobilize
the necessary resources.

•

Capacity Building: A commitment to local capacity
building from the earliest stages is vital for
sustainability.

•

Time Element: Time has two dimensions in postconflict reconstruction. Timely, opportunistic and
quick-impact interventions are critical in
influencing peacebuilding outcomes. However,
reconstruction itself is a long-term process, that
may take a generation to bear fruit. Rapid response
is necessary but not sufficient for success.

•

Funding: Adequate, predictable and flexible
funding is essential to support post-conflict
reconstruction. Appropriate funding mechanisms
are indispensable to have impact on the ground in
a timely manner.

V. Operational Principles of PostConflict Peacebuilding
The previous review sought to demonstrate that key
bilateral and multilateral actors approached postconflict peacebuilding from multiple perspectives
without a common definition or “doctrine” of
peacebuilding. Nonetheless, peacebuilding interventions since the early 1990s have begun to exhibit
certain common characteristics with the result that
practice has come to substitute for doctrine.42
A review of practice throughout the 1990s reveals a set
of operational principles that can be said to constitute
a shared “post-conflict peacebuilding paradigm.” These
are worth highlighting:
•

•

•

•

Peacebuilding is a Multi-Dimensional Enterprise
with Several Pillars: While various actors define
these pillars differently, there is consensus that
peacebuilding has political, social, economic,
security and legal dimensions, each of which
requires attention. Distinguishing it from conventional development, peacebuilding is understood to
be a highly political project involving the creation
of a legitimate political authority that can avoid
the resurgence of violence.
Security is Key: Establishing security is considered
the pre-requisite for post-conflict peacebuilding.
Hierarchy of Priorities: While peacebuilding is a
multi-faceted
process
requiring
holistic
approaches, it needs to be guided by a hierarchy of
priorities established in response to the specific
needs and political dynamics in a given context.
Establishing such a hierarchy requires an overall
political strategy.
Ownership: The people of the war-torn society
must own the reconstruction process. They must

Operational Principles of Post-Conflict Peacebuilding

• Response Levels: Post-conflict reconstruction
involves appropriate responses at the local,
national, regional and international levels.
•

Accountability: Given the high stakes in postconflict environments, the commitment to “do no
harm” while supporting peacebuilding is an
essential principle.43

The growing consensus on these operational principles
attests to the fact that post-conflict peacebuilding has
evolved significantly as a field of practice in the last

9

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

decade—with impressive learning and adaptation on
the part of key actors. Underpinning these principles is
the explicit recognition that external actors need to
play an important but primarily catalytic role in postconflict peacebuilding, which is a long-term,
homegrown and political process.
While recognizing the need to anchor their efforts in
the target countries, throughout the 1990s external
actors invested their energies, activities and resources
in enhancing their own guidelines, capacities,
operations, and institutional arrangements as well as
compiling serial lessons learned from their operations.
How has this collective learning translated into
peacebuilding outcomes on the ground? What have
been the results of more than a decade of experimentation, learning, and practice in post-conflict
peacebuilding?

VI. From Practice to Results:
Reviewing the Record
Four important trends need to be considered in
reviewing the record of post-conflict peacebuilding.
First, although the number of violent conflicts has been
on a downward trend since the end of the Cold War,
there is strong evidence of recidivism in many postconflict countries, as witnessed in Eritrea-Ethiopia,
Angola, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Haiti. 44 Longitudinal
research undertaken by Collier and colleagues indicate
that there is almost a forty-four percent risk of a
country reaching the end of a conflict to return to
conflict within five years. 45
Second, the end of war does not necessarily translate
into peacebuilding. In numerous countries where peace
agreements have held without a relapse into conflict
beyond the critical period, the structural factors lying
at the source of the original conflict remain
unaddressed and continue to fester. From Cambodia
and Guatemala to East Timor, serious issues related to
land tenure, property rights, rule of law, political
participation and transitional justice continue to pose
serious challenges to peace consolidation and
peacebuilding. Conflict prevention literature points to
these structural factors as potential seeds of future
wars.46 In other post-conflict countries such as El

10

Salvador or South Africa where political violence has
been curtailed, there is strong evidence of the mutation
of political violence into criminal and common
violence. In other cases, such as the West African
region with multiple conflict-torn countries, the
curtailment of violence in one country has had
“ballooning effects” as violence has been exported to
neighboring countries. In other words, the end of the
political violence has not led to peacebuilding.
Third, even in cases where peace has held beyond the
initial post-conflict phase as in Sierra Leone, Bosnia
and Kosovo, the need for the continued presence of
international peacekeepers has shed serious doubt
about the long-term viability of the post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts in these contexts.
Fourth, if peacebuilding is designed to bridge the
transition from humanitarian relief to a country's
return to a conventional development trajectory, the
unchanging status of most post-conflict countries at
the bottom rungs of various development indices
cannot be ignored. These trends are not encouraging in
terms of the longer term prospects of countries
emerging from conflict. However, they do not
necessarily provide the basis for assessing the success
of international peacebuilding efforts. For that, there is
need for evaluation of external peacebuilding
interventions.
Evaluating Peacebuilding
Rigorous, systematic and comparative peacebuilding
evaluations at the country level remain an underdeveloped area. 47
There are good reasons why it is difficult to evaluate
peacebuilding, which is a long-term process that does
not readily lend itself to causal analysis.48 Moreover,
there is little consensus about the definition or the
ultimate goals of peacebuilding with the result that
analysts differ amongst themselves in evaluating
peacebuilding outcomes. In the absence of a reliable
body of peacebuilding evaluations at the country level,
the following review is based upon two complementary
bodies of literature. The first is the broader academic
literature dealing with civil wars, conflict resolution,
peacemaking, peace implementation, and post-conflict

From Practice to Results: Reviewing the Record

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

reconstruction. The second is the operational evaluations undertaken or commissioned by external actors
of their own peacebuilding programs, projects and
activities.49 Although these two bodies of work employ
different methodologies and approaches, when viewed
together, they provide useful insights into the
peacebuilding efforts since the 1990s.
The academic literature is both diverse and openended. Researchers approach peacebuilding from
divergent perspectives. Many analysts focus more on
the peacemaking, peace implementation and early
post-conflict phases where the international role is
more dominant and the policy implications for international actors in greater demand. There are fewer studies
employing a longer-term perspective on post-conflict
peacebuilding and fewer cases of longer-term
peacebuilding to study.
Despite the definitional and methodological variations
among them, there is a critical mass of country-based
research, which allows some comparative perspective on
what the international community has attempted in the
last decade and a comparative assessment of outcomes.
Some researchers take a minimalist approach in
evaluating peacebuilding, defining it as the avoidance of
a return to violence; others adopt a maximalist approach
by searching for evidence of structural transformation of
the economic, social and political factors that had led to
war in the first place. Still others take an instrumentalist
approach by identifying promising short-term changes
underpinning the peace, which can contribute to more
sustainable societal transformation in the long run.
However, there is no common framework that allows for
a systematic examination of the different dimensions of
peacebuilding: political, security, economic and psychosocial. Most studies grapple with the problem of how to
account for environmental factors (such as the existence
of spoilers, the role of regional neighbors, and the nature
of war economies) that heavily affect peacebuilding
outcomes while assessing the impact of external
interventions. There is no easy solution to this challenge.
Research Findings
In the absence of a common evaluation framework,
this paper draws upon findings from several multicountry studies to compare their assessment of

From Practice to Results: Reviewing the Record

peacebuilding outcomes based primarily on the
political/security aspects of peacebuilding. The
shortcomings of the economic benefits of
peacebuilding in terms of a return to a sustainable
development course is easier to ascertain through a
comparative review of the development indicators of
post-conflict countries and is therefore not covered
below. However, it is also recognized that many
conflict-torn countries originally start with very low
development indicators. Thus, the vicious cycle
between conflict and underdevelopment remains a
perennial issue.
One of the most comprehensive studies of international
peacebuilding is the seminal work by Doyle and
Sambanis entitled “International Peacebuilding: A
Theoretical and Quantitative Analysis.” Using an
extensive data set of 124 post-World War II civil wars,
the study examines a range of international interventions ranging from monitoring missions, traditional
peacekeeping, multidimensional peacekeeping and
peace enforcement. In other words, like many other
similar studies, it does not differentiate between the
peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding roles of the international actors. The
study finds that multilateral enforcement operations
are usually successful in ending the violence and that
there is a positive correlation between UN
peacekeeping operations and democratization
processes after civil wars. However, even using their
lenient criteria of success in terms of war termination,
many post–Cold War civil wars covered by Doyle and
Sambanis are considered failures. 50
Taking a narrower definition of peacebuilding, in his
recent book entitled At War's End: Building Peace
After Civil Conflict, Roland Paris examined eleven case
studies. Focusing narrowly on two dimensions of postconflict peacebuilding (namely political and economic
liberalization), Paris sought to identify whether
political and economic liberalization strategies
promoted by the international community contributed
in any discernible way to the resurgence of fighting or
to ameliorating the conditions that had led to war. His
conclusion is that the record is quite mixed: “In most
of the eleven cases, the process of political liberalization, or economic liberalization, or both, produced
destabilizing side effects that worked against the

11

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

consolidation of peace. In some countries, liberalization exacerbated societal tensions; and in others it
reproduced traditional sources of violence. The
approach to peacebuilding that prevailed in the 1990s
was, it seems, based on overtly optimistic assumptions
about the effects of democratization and marketization
in the immediate aftermath of civil war.”51
Similarly, in a forthcoming study entitled The UN's
Role in Nation-Building: From the Belgian Congo to
Iraq, a sequel to their earlier study entitled America's
Role in Nation-Building, James Dobbins and colleagues
reviewed sixteen cases of “nation-building” since
1945.52 In their study, “nation-building” corresponds to
the UN's terminology for combined peacekeeping/
peacebuilding operations. They define it as the use of
military force in the aftermath of a conflict to underpin
rapid and fundamental societal transformation. In
other words, “nation-building” involves multidimensional peace operations, including civilian tasks
such as stabilizing the security environment, building
the state's military and police forces, overseeing
humanitarian relief efforts, providing administrative
support to government ministries, overseeing a transition to democracy, and improving economic growth
and stability.53
Defining success broadly as the ability to establish a
stable and enduring democratic political system, these
two companion studies examined several quantitative
and qualitative indicators of success in the selected
countries. These included the number of combatrelated casualties suffered by the mission, return rates
of refugees and internally displaced persons, type of
political system that evolved, and economic growth
rates. On the two key criteria—of enduring peace and
democratic development—the study concludes that
among the sixteen cases studied in their comparative
studies of UN- and US-led nation-building operations,
five are not at peace today.54 The authors recognize that
objective judgments are more difficult on democratic
development; however, using Freedom House and
University of Maryland Polity Project ratings, they
conclude that eleven out of sixteen cases studied
remain democratic.55
Thus, using the relatively macro-level criteria of a
holding peace and transition to competitive politics,

12

the conclusions from these multi-country studies
demonstrate that peacebuilding has a mixed track
record.
These findings parallel the results of a study by
Michael Lund which provides a useful summary of the
conclusions drawn by six different sets of studies on
the effectiveness of international efforts in building
peace in seventeen post-conflict countries. 56 According
to Lund:
“Though they differ in rating some of the missions,
these several studies sort out successes from
failures quite consistently. Except for a few like
Cambodia where differing interpretations are
given, there is considerable agreement about those
countries where some minimum notion of negative
peace has been achieved and where it has not.
Post-conflict peacebuilding has produced positive
results in some places, but as many or more have
been ‘failures.' Thus, peacebuilding effectiveness in
terms of the absence of violence is not a yes or no
matter. Quite different outcomes resulted from
different cases, and success and failure each
showed some gradations. That the overall picture is
quite mixed, even on the most uncontested
peacebuilding criterion of ending the threat of
major violence, is an important finding.”57
Combined with the longer-term trends outlined above,
the conclusions of these comparative case studies are
sobering and point to a need to examine the factors
that have militated against effective peacebuilding
outcomes.

VII. Challenges to Effective PostConflict Peacebuilding
The existing body of literature sheds light on two sets
of questions to explain the mixed record of international peacebuilding. The first deals with the policies,
strategies, and approaches employed by external actors
to determine whether these were appropriate to the
challenges of post-conflict peacebuilding. In other
words: Did the international community do the right
thing? The second relates to the effective implementation of international policies, strategies and

Challenges to Effective Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

approaches. In other words: Did the international
community do peacebuilding right?
These are different sets of issues and need corrective
action at different levels. Nonetheless, they both
impact upon the effectiveness of peacebuilding as
demonstrated by policy relevant research. Academic
studies generally examine broader systemic or political
factors while operational evaluations tend to focus on
implementation issues.
Systemic and Structural Issues
Research on conflict and peacebuilding reveals that
although the international community places great
importance on “getting it right” at the country level,
there are important political and systemic issues that
affect peacebuilding outcomes. Five such issues
deserve particular attention.
International peacebuilding, despite its lofty aspirations, is a political undertaking which is ultimately
dependent upon the political will and commitment of
national governments. Thus, the first determining
factor is inevitably the level and nature of support
provided by member states. 58
The second relates to the difficulty of “de-linking”
post-conflict reconstruction in any given country from
its regional environment. Regional conflict formations
and their implications for post-conflict peacebuilding
have become one of the most promising areas of policy
research. It is increasingly recognized that focusing
narrowly on country-level peacebuilding efforts is
unlikely to yield significant changes in peacebuilding
outcomes—especially in regions where conflicts have
interlocking political, security and economic dynamics.
Yet, international approaches to peacebuilding remain
almost exclusively at the country level.59
A third systemic issue relates to the availability and
deployment of necessary financial resources for postconflict reconstruction in a timely manner. This is a
difficult policy area since it requires a radical rethinking of existing funding sources and mechanisms
for post-conflict reconstruction.60 As mentioned above,
multilateral and bilateral donors have initiated innovative ways of dealing with the funding challenge

Challenges to Effective Peacebuilding

through designated post-conflict peacebuilding
funding mechanisms, Conflict Pools, and multi-donor
trust funds. 61 However, with the exception of strategically important countries (such as Bosnia), analysts
note the inadequacy of both the absolute amounts of
aid as well as the mechanisms through which aid is
disbursed.62 A strong body of research demonstrates
that without timely, sustained, and well-targeted
resources, external support to post-conflict
peacebuilding is unlikely to make a significant difference on the ground.63 While high levels of aid are not
a guarantee of success, the inadequacy of aid
condemns post-conflict peacebuilding efforts to
tinkering on the margins. 64
A fourth systemic issue relates to the viability of
country-based peacebuilding strategies de-linked from
broader trends in a globalized world economy. For
example, there is growing evidence that the failure to
address international trade in conflict goods helps to
sustain criminal economic networks in post-conflict
contexts, thereby significantly reducing the impact of
in-country peacebuilding strategies.65 Similarly, the
steady global trade in small arms and light weapons
compounds the difficulties of country-based DDR
strategies. Analysts note that international support for
post-conflict peacebuilding needs to be strengthened
through greater coherence across various policy areas
at the global level. These include trade, aid, private
investment, disarmament and arms control, human
rights and natural resource management.66 Bilateral and
multilateral donors increasingly recognize the interconnections between different policies and have begun to
call for “linked-up” or “whole-of-government” strategies such as the three Ds (defense, diplomacy, development) in Canada, the Utstein principles, and Sweden's
recently-released “Shared Responsibility: Sweden's
Policy for Global Development.”
Finally, institutional architecture issues affect the
success of peacebuilding. As already noted, there are
diverse actors at the governmental and inter-governmental levels involved in peacebuilding without an
effective mechanism for better alignment of their
collective efforts. Despite its pioneering role in
promoting peacebuilding, the United Nations remains
poorly organized to deal with the challenges of postconflict peacebuilding. The relations between the

13

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Security Council and ECOSOC (the UN's key organs
with responsibility for security and socio-economic
issues respectively), are dysfunctional and counterproductive.67 Similarly, notwithstanding many efforts
at internal re-organization, the three departments
within the UN Secretariat—DPA, DPKO and OCHA—face
ongoing difficulties coordinating their respective
peacebuilding operations. The creation of the
Executive Committee for Peace and Security (ECPS) is
a step in the right direction. However, it does not go far
enough in promoting policy coherence and coordination within the UN family, including the UN's various
funds and programs and the Bretton Woods institutions—each of which has a different governing board
and mandate.68
Policy Orthodoxy
The suitability of externally promoted policies for postconflict peacebuilding has attracted considerable
research attention. As noted, peacebuilding has a
liberal normative orientation. When applied to postconflict contexts, the peacebuilding “template” has
come to include concrete programs and projects such
as civil society promotion, multi-party elections,
constitutionalism, rule of law, human and minority
rights, gender equality, good governance through
transparency and accountability, economic liberalization, and security sector reform. These policies are
considered as part of an overall package that is
coherent and mutually reinforcing. There is growing
evidence that a liberal peacebuilding package might be
fundamentally ill suited for post-conflict contexts.69
The most radical critics of the liberal peacebuilding
agenda challenge the assumption that civil wars and
political violence are an aberration which can be
redressed through the use of appropriate tools and
instruments. These analysts see contemporary civil wars
as natural products of aggressive globalization, which
simultaneously creates wealth and stability for some
and instability and violence for others in an interconnected global system.70 Although quite uncompromising, this analysis deserves consideration at a time
when civil wars are rarely confined within states, and
the role of transnational networks in promoting and
perpetuating local wars is increasingly recognized.

14

Other analysts challenge the appropriateness of liberal
strategies in dealing specifically with the needs of
post-conflict countries. There are different strands to
this line of criticism. For example, a seminal study by
James Boyce and colleagues on post-conflict economic
strategies in El Salvador demonstrated that conventional economic reform packages are inappropriate and
counterproductive in post conflict contexts. Boyce and
colleagues argued that during the post-conflict transition, the goals of economic policy cannot be limited to
macroeconomic stabilization and conventional
structural adjustment—which are the mainstay of
liberal economic policy. Instead, economic policy must
also promote the adjustment toward peace. These
require policies that mobilize resources for the peace
process and financing the immediate costs of peace
while addressing the longer-term relationship among
economic growth, income distribution, and the consolidation of peace. 71
This early study has been reinforced by a major
research project undertaken by the Development
Research Group at the World Bank on the economic
costs and consequences of civil wars. In a recent book
entitled Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and
Development Policy, Paul Collier and colleagues argue
that well-chosen policies can reduce the global
incidence of civil war, provided that they are
appropriate to different conflict contexts and take
country-specific characteristics into account.72 They
propose different economic strategies for four different
types of conflict contexts: conflict prevention in
successful developers; marginalized countries at peace;
ending conflicts and reducing post-conflict risks.
Noting that post-conflict countries are a small but a
particularly difficult subset, they maintain that the
international community can significantly reduce the
risk of renewed conflict in these countries by
implementing a set of policies that are relatively
“straightforward to implement.” These include more
targeted strategies for economic growth, better
sequencing of development assistance, and greater
integration of economic policies with political and
military strategies (including disarmament and
demobilization, engagement of diasporas, political
reform and external military presence.) Their study
supports the liberal economic reform agenda, but

Challenges to Effective Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

argues that in post conflict contexts the scope for rapid
reforms requires that it be limited to two or three
policies with rapid payoffs. It further suggests that the
relative importance of macroeconomic, social and
structural reform is quite different in post-conflict
settings, with social policy taking precedence over
macroeconomic policy.73
The policy recommendations promoted by Collier and
colleagues have been strongly opposed on various
grounds. The most persistent criticism is that this body
of research reduces civil wars and conflicts to their
essential economic elements, which are then found to
be amenable to policy fixes by international actors.
While this is true, Collier's powerful critique of
conventional macroeconomic policies in post-conflict
contexts merits recognition. Indeed, early research by
de Soto and del Castillo warned precisely against the
counterproductive disconnect between the conventional macro economic policies pursued by the Bretton
Woods institutions and the political strategies
promoted by the UN in El Salvador.74
Overall, economic policies for post-conflict
peacebuilding remain poorly understood and designed.
Theories of economic development, dating to the decolonization period of the early 1950s and 1960s, are
largely out-of-step with the challenges of post-conflict
reconstruction in the post–Cold War era. The contradictions between the reform and reconstruction
agendas are not sufficiently acknowledged, with the
result that reform strategies are promoted without close
attention to the challenges of reconstruction.75 Based
on a growing understanding of the economic dynamics
of contemporary civil wars, there is a new wave of
studies that are beginning to examine alternative
economic and social policies for post-conflict
peacebuilding. These focus on such issues as employment, livelihoods and social policies targeted to special
groups including economic spoilers, returnees and
displaced populations and de-mobilized soldiers.76
Despite its shortcomings, economic liberalism remains
the dominant paradigm for international peacebuilding
assistance. However, the creation of the Low Income
Countries Under Stress (LICUS) project at the World
Bank, the recognition of “difficult partnerships” by the

Challenges to Effective Peacebuilding

OECD DAC, and the numerous countries-at-risk studies
produced by donor agencies are important steps in
reshaping donor policies.77 One of the few studies that
focuses primarily on the role of national actors
(communities, the private sectors and states) in
contributing to broad based, anti-poverty recovery and
growth after conflict is Tony Addison's book entitled
From Conflict to Recovery in Africa.78
The uneasy fit between externally driven policies and
fragile conditions in post-conflict countries becomes
even sharper when examining external support for
political liberalization. There is a rich and growing
literature on democracy assistance.79 These studies point
to several important features of donor-driven democracy
assistance programs, which have direct peacebuilding
implications. Donor programs in democracy assistance
are generally skewed in favor of boiler plate favorites
such as elections, human rights promotion and media
development—which do not necessarily correspond to
local needs. Moreover, the donor preference for timebound projects is at odds with the need for building and
nurturing sustainable domestic political processes.
Evaluation studies increasingly demonstrate that the
success of democratization processes in post-conflict
societies depends more on domestic/regional factors
(such as political power structures, socio-economic
conditions, historical experiences, leadership and
regional neighborhood) than on donor-led democracy
assistance models. Some analysts also note that donor
pressure for democratization in post-conflict countries
risk jeopardizing fragile peace processes and thus pose
serious threats to peacebuilding.80
In his aforementioned book, Paris makes a similar
argument. According to Paris, economic and political
liberalization are particularly ill suited and counterproductive in post-conflict peacebuilding since they
promote economic and political competition at a
difficult and fragile phase. Instead, Paris recommends a
gradual and controlled peacebuilding strategy, which
he calls “Institutionalization Before Liberalization.”
Along with a growing body of literature on statebuilding, Paris supports the establishment of domestic
institutions that are capable of managing the transition
from war while avoiding the destabilizing effects of
democratization and marketization.81

15

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

The critique of donor approaches to economic and
political liberalization is echoed in other studies that
examine discrete aspects of the post-conflict
governance programs promoted by the international
community in other areas such as security sector
reform and rule of law. These studies draw attention to
the tensions and contradictions that exist between
different policy prescriptions, as well as the inability of
external actors to tailor these to concrete contexts. It is
argued that external actors follow a narrow template
that is often divorced from domestic political realities.
While there is little consensus among analysts about
the most appropriate policy options, there is strong
agreement that ultimately local political processes and
institutions should play an important role in shaping
the design, implementation and outcomes of policy
choices.82
Policy Implementation
The above review drew attention to some of the builtin contradictions and limitations of current international approaches to peacebuilding. The effectiveness
of peacebuilding policies also depends greatly on their
implementation. The United Nations, donor governments, regional organizations, international NGOs and
other international actors have individually and collectively started to document “Policy Guidelines,”
“Lessons Learned,” and “Best Practices” in
peacebuilding. These include sectoral studies on key
components of the new peacebuilding agenda such as
peace implementation and peace enforcement; truth
and reconciliation; gender and peacebuilding;
governance and participation. They also include
operational lessons on inter-agency collaboration and
coordination, institutional and individual skills
development and training, new funding mechanisms,
timing of interventions and exit strategies.83
These evaluation studies provide valuable lessons on
implementation of peacebuilding programs and
projects across agencies and contexts. These generally
relate to the design, delivery and monitoring of
peacebuilding on the part of external actors.84 Many
commissioned studies are internally-focused—seeking
ways of improving the performance of client agencies
themselves through internal improvements related to
recruitment, training, deployment of funds, program

16

design and management, and monitoring and evaluation.85 Among these studies, a series of papers produced
by the Center on International Cooperation (CIC) at
New York University for the June 2004 meeting in
Copenhagen on Civilian Crisis Management
Capabilities deserves special attention.86 These papers
not only examine the nagging problems in the civilian
dimensions of peacebuilding practice by external
actors, but they provide practical and far-reaching
recommendations for improving the capacities of
international actors.
Although salutary, the continued focus of external
actors on their own activities, capacities and
mechanisms tends to overshadow the more pressing
need to strengthen the capacities of domestic actors.
Ultimately, the transfer of power, resources and capacities to local actors defines the effectiveness of
peacebuilding on the ground. Indeed, many evaluation
studies readily acknowledge this but shy away from
offering ways of addressing it. Basically, there are
several persistent problems in the implementation of
peacebuilding policies and programs:
•

Donors channel their support in the form of timebound projects without a strategic framework and
long-term commitment to peacebuilding.

•

Despite lip service paid to local ownership, there is
a disconnect between external priorities and
programs and national processes and priorities.

•

External actors consistently neglect institution and
capacity building, which are recognized as central
to peacebuilding.

•

In the absence of a strategic peacebuilding
framework, external interventions are uncoordinated, fragmented, and incoherent.

In a nutshell, external actors approach peacebuilding as
a short-term, time-bound, project-based enterprise,
even while acknowledging that peacebuilding is a longterm, home-grown, multi-dimensional process. As one
study notes: “Although the quick fix might be unavoidable in humanitarian assistance, it should not be
applied in peace-building. The dominant approach to
peace-building should therefore be re-examined and

Challenges to Effective Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

reframed. This entails coming up with a framework that
fosters not only local ownership but builds on local
capacities, and takes a more process-oriented approach
to create endogenous political capacity to cope with
future violent conflict. Furthermore, it asks for priority
setting of certain programmes under the guidance of a
clear peace-building strategy.”87
It concludes: “This void in international policy making
asks for a systematic assessment of international
assistance to post-conflict societies in order to identify
the critical factors that contribute to the success of
institutions that help to foster sustainable peace. Such
factors may include the role of local and external
actors and the question of ownership of the peace
process, the commitment of local stakeholders to the
establishment of political arrangements for managing
conflicting interests and the presence of wellorganized civil society and independent media organizations that can serve as ‘watchdogs' for the behaviour
of local, regional and national (governmental) institutions.”88

VIII.Challenges to Consolidating
Post-Conflict Peacebuilding
The above analysis highlighted the multiple problems
that continue to bedevil peacebuilding more than a
decade since its inception. These derive largely from
the policy, institutional, operational and resource
issues specific to the design and implementation of
peacebuilding assistance. However, peacebuilding faces
another set of challenges related to the broader
international context, which also deserves serious
attention.
International peacebuilding emerged at a special point
in history when the ending of bloc politics created
opportunities for multilateral cooperation to address
violent conflicts around the world. Although never
divorced from state interests, peacebuilding
represented a collective international project. It is not
evident that the international commitment to the
expanded peacebuilding project will outlive the serious
political cleavages and challenges that have emerged
on the international stage in the wake of 9/11, and
especially after the war in Iraq.

Challenges to Consolidating Peacebuilding

The international commitment to post-conflict
peacebuilding is under threat from three main sources.
The first relates to the heightened urgency of security
threats posed by terrorism, proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and the new arms race among states.
When confronted with “hard” threats to their national
interests, states inevitably re-order their priorities,
diplomatic energies and financial resources. To the
extent that certain conflicts such as Afghanistan and
Iraq are seen as national security issues, they will
continue to attract external assistance motivated
largely by the geo-strategic and security interests of
powerful external actors. Other peacebuilding needs, as
in the Sudan, Burundi and the DRC, are therefore
relegated to “second tier” international concernsattracting limited political attention and resources
despite their urgency and gravity.
There is a second, and in the long run perhaps more
corrosive, threat to the entire international
peacebuilding enterprise. Post-conflict peacebuilding
rested on the premise that physical security, political
stability, social reconciliation, and economic
reconstruction are integrated elements of a domestically owned enterprise in which external actors need to
play a supportive role. The necessity of internal
ownership was firmly accepted by international actors,
although this paper demonstrated the serious
shortcomings in achieving that goal.
Since 9/11, peacebuilding has been conflated with a
new discourse of “nation-building,” “regime change,”
and “stabilization and reconstruction” which is
predicated on the necessity of forcefully securing the
stability of weak or failing states to avoid the
negative fall-out from state failure. Such a formulation, driven primarily by external concerns, is likely
to undermine the basic agreement that peace, security
and stability cannot be imposed from outside but
need to be nurtured internally through patient,
flexible, responsive strategies that are in tune with
domestic realities.
The post 9/11 “stabilization” agenda is cast in the same
terms as the peacebuilding agenda of the early 1990s,
with a call for holistic, joined-up approaches to avoid
state failure and state collapse. However, the drivers of
the stabilization agenda are the national security

17

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

interests of dominant external actors—regionally or
internationally.89 The peacebuilding interventions of
the 1990s, which were largely motivated by humanitarian impulses, will be seen to have prepared the
ground for external interventions in sovereign states—
albeit for a different agenda. This is bound to create a
backlash against international peacebuilding when it is
most needed. Recent debates on the Darfur crisis and
the peace process in the Sudan have revealed the
heightened political sensitivities among the UN's
member states.
In light of its overwhelming power and its policies in
Afghanistan and Iraq, the United States remains the
critical player in this regard although other countries
including Russia, have also embraced it for their own
purposes. Given the nature of the US political system,
there are divergent views on both the nature of the new
stabilization agenda and on how best to implement it.
These are reflected in the mushrooming academic and
policy literature in the field.90 A recent study usefully
distinguishes between three “generations” of the
American approach to post conflict reconstruction:
Post–World War II Occupations; Post–Cold War
Humanitarian
Interventions;
and
Post–9/11
Interventions in an Era of Global Terrorism and WMD.
The study goes on to argue that “Iraq is the case that
could define the newest generation of nation building.
The situation on the ground and how the Bush
administration responds to it will determine whether
this effort becomes a real post-conflict reconstruction
effort or else becomes a counter insurgency strategy
that uses post-conflict reconstruction tools”
[emphasis added].91
Indeed, whatever the actual label, the externally driven
nature of the “stabilization and reconstruction” agenda
would almost certainly require policy tools, instruments and approaches that are sufficiently different
from the multilateral “peacebuilding paradigm”
described in this paper.
A final threat to the peacebuilding agenda arises from
the deep political divisions that have emerged within
the international community following the US-led war
on terrorism and the war in Iraq. These divisions are

18

not simply ideological, developmental or geographic in
nature. They cut across multiple divides, and
undermine ongoing efforts to define a common and
collective framework for international action in the
early years of the 21st century. Within the Security
Council, at the General Assembly, within regional
organizations, and even among allies, there are deep
differences as to what constitutes the top priorities for
the international community and how to address them.
The establishment of the Secretary General's High
Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change is
indicative of the uncertainties at the international
level. The “international compact” (articulated in the
Millennium Declaration, An Agenda for Peace and An
Agenda for Development) that was endorsed at the end
of the Cold War seems to have lost its hold. There is
currently no comparable substitute to give direction or
cohesion to the efforts of the international community
to address the multiple threats and challenges that lie
ahead.
The United Nations, which represents the collective
international will, is in need of reform. However,
reform efforts have run into major obstacles. Great
expectations are placed in the High Level Panel to
propose recommendations to reform the international
system to respond to new of global threats and
challenges. It is unlikely, however, that the Panel's
recommendations will be acceptable to both the
powerful members of the UN as well as to the
majority of its members. It is anticipated that the
Panel will identify post-conflict peacebuilding as a
key priority due to its contributions to international
peace and security. Even then, it is not certain that
the international community can garner the political
will and the resources to address it effectively given
the current composition of the Security Council and
the General Assembly as well as the UN's chronic
shortage of resources for post-conflict peacebuilding
without the involvement of the key bilateral and
multilateral donors. The aforementioned political
cleavages in the international community are already
beginning to reflect themselves in the priorities and
operations of the main bilateral and multilateral
donors with the risk of the “securitization” of
development aid.

Challenges to Effective Peacebuilding

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

IX. Conclusion
The persistence of intra-state and civil conflicts in
different regions (especially in Africa), the breakdown of
peace processes and the relapse of a number of countries
into violent conflict (such as in Sri Lanka and
Colombia), and the emergence of new conflicts ensure
that post-conflict peacebuilding will continue to require
international assistance in the coming years and decades
despite its multiple shortcomings and weaknesses. If the
United Nations and other external actors who were in
the forefront of post-conflict peacebuilding of the 1990s
decide that peacebuilding is too important an enterprise
to give up, they face a dual challenge. They need to

Conclusion

learn from and further improve upon the innovative but
modest gains made to date in peacebuilding policy and
practice. They also need to stop the slippery slope of
providing an easy cover for the unilateralist impulses of
powerful members of the UN family by subordinating
international peacebuilding to the post–9/11 agenda of
stabilization and reconstruction. As some of the most
vulnerable members of the international community,
conflict-affected countries depend upon multidimensional international assistance to achieve their
simultaneous need for security and development. The
principles for effective peacebuilding are now
sufficiently established to enable the next decade of
peacebuilding to yield better results—provided there is
the necessary political will.

19

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Endnotes
_________________________
1 After the Conflict: A review of selected sources on rebuilding war-torn societies, which was undertaken by Patricia Weiss Fagen as
part of WSP, provided an inventory of the state of knowledge at the time. The literature was relatively limited and Weiss Fagen
usefully grouped key resources into several broad categories: a) general works, b) international organizational capacities, c) reforming
security structures, d) political rebuilding, e) economic rebuilding, and f) social rebuilding, local empowerment and capacity building.
2 In May 2002, a joint project team from the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) and the Association of the United
States Army (AUSA) produced a detailed Post-Conflict Reconstruction Framework. It provided a comprehensive inventory of tasks
that external actors face in assisting countries emerging from conflict. Drawing from a rich body of literature and experience gained
in the intervening years, the joint CSIS/AUSA framework laid out a “universe of options” that confront international peacebuilders
on four fronts: security; justice and reconciliation; social and economic well-being; and governance and participation. The tasks
falling under each “pillar” of reconstruction were organized into three phases: initial response, transformation, and fostering sustainability—each phase requiring a different mix of policies and strategies. Although not a road map to post-conflict reconstruction, the
depth and breadth of the issues covered by the CSIS/AUSA framework are impressive. See <http://www.csis.org/
isp.pcr/framework.pdf>.
3 United Nations, An Agenda for Development: Report of the Secretary-General, UN Doc A/48/935 (6 May 1994).
4 Charles Call, “The Problem of Peacebuilding: How UN Thinking Has Evolved in Recent Years,” draft paper prepared for DPA, 27
August 2004.
5 In an earlier paper entitled “Peacebuilding as the Link between Security and Development” (IPA Reports, Dec. 2003), I have argued
in favor of the expanded definition of peacebuilding since a sequential approach to peace no longer holds true.
6 Joint Utstein Study of Peacebuilding: National Report on Germany (Eschborn: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit
(GTZ) GmbH, 2003).
7 During the Cold War, the international community was so polarized that there was little room for collective, non-partisan international action on issues dealing with peace and security. Moreover, the artificial division between security and development issues
ensured that international development community did not engage in peace and security issues while the political and security actors
avoided direct involvement in the socio-economic affairs of war-prone or war-affected states. In other words, during the Cold War,
post-conflict peacebuilding (involving active political engagement in the socio-economic reconstruction of sovereign states) did not
exist as an international project.
8 The applicability of the peacebuilding model of the 1990s to Afghanistan and Iraq is not universally accepted. Some analysts argue
that these countries represent only more difficult cases of peacebuilding. Others consider them sui generis because of the preceding
military action in both cases and the fact that the international role is not that of a disinterested “third party.” Whatever the final
verdict, the terms of the debate have changed significantly since 9/11 as peacebuilding is equated with regime change, stabilization,
state building and nation building as instruments of foreign policies of certain states.
9 In the case of international wars, An Agenda for Peace called for confidence building measures, joint programs, cultural and
educational projects, and noted: “… the concept of peace-building as the construction of a new environment should be viewed as the
counterpart of preventive diplomacy, which seeks to avoid the breakdown of peaceful conditions. … Preventive diplomacy is to avoid
a crisis; post-conflict peace-building is to prevent a recurrence.” United Nations, An Agenda for Peace: Preventive Diplomacy,
Peacemaking and Peace-keeping (Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to the statement adopted by the Summit Meeting of the
Security Council on 31 January 1992), UN Doc A/47/277-S/2411 (17 June 1992).
10 The Supplement to An Agenda for Peace reviewed two kinds of post-conflict peacebuilding: when it is linked to a multifunctional
peacekeeping operation, and when it is undertaken without any peacekeeping operation being deployed. It argued that the first
situation is the easier to manage, since the UN already has an entree. Yet it warned that the “timing and modalities of the departure

20

Endnotes

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

of the peace-keeping operation and the transfer of its peace-building functions to others must therefore be carefully managed.” In
turning to the more difficult situation when peace-building activities are needed in a country where the UN has no peacemaking or
peace-keeping mandate, the Supplement outlined a dual role for the UN: through its economic, social and humanitarian agencies and
programs and under the purview of the UN resident coordinator; and through political action at the level of UN Headquarters. United
Nations, Supplement to An Agenda for Peace: Position Paper of the Secretary-General on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of
the United Nations, UN Doc A/50/60-S/1995/1 (3 January 1995).
11 The Supplement added that in such cases, it may be necessary to arrange the transfer of decision-making responsibility from the
Security Council (which had authorized the mandate and deployment of peacekeepers) to the General Assembly or other inter-governmental bodies with responsibility for the civilian peacebuilding activities that would continue.
12 Call, “The Problem of Peacebuilding: How UN Thinking Has Evolved in Recent Years.”
13 United Nations, Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (Brahimi Report), UN Doc A/55/305-S/2000/809 (21
August 2000).
14 United Nations, Review of Technical Cooperation in the United Nations (Report of the Secretary-General), 19 September 2003, UN
Doc A/58/382 (19 September 2003).
15 See the United Nations, UN Doc S/PRST/2001/5: “The Security Council recognizes that peace-building is aimed at preventing the
outbreak, the recurrence or continuation of armed conflict and therefore encompasses a wider range of political, developmental,
humanitarian and human rights programmes and mechanisms. This requires short and long term actions tailored to address the
particular needs of societies sliding into conflict or emerging from it. These actions should focus on fostering sustainable institutions
and processes in areas such as sustainable development, the eradication of poverty and inequalities, transparent and accountable
governance, the promotion of democracy, respect for human rights and the rule of law and the promotion of a culture of peace and
non-violence.”
16 See Call, “The Problem of Peacebuilding: How UN Thinking Has Evolved in Recent Years.” Given its narrow focus on post-conflict
peacebuilding, this paper does not examine the combined peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding role of the UN in its multidimensional peace operations. However, the multilateral approaches to post-conflict peacebuilding under the UN umbrella provide
the framework within which peacebuilding policy and practice since the 1990s will be reviewed.
17 Brian Urquhart, “The Good General,” New York Review of Books 51, no. 14 (September 23, 2004).
18 For a thoughtful and comprehensive history of the creation of the post–World War II international normative and legal order, see
Ralakrishnan Rajagopal, International Law from Below: Development, Social Movements and Third World Resistance (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003).
19 For a list of these conferences and the Millennium Declaration, see <www.un.org>.
20 David M. Malone, The UN Security Council: From the Cold War to the 21st Century (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2004).
21 International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS), “The Responsibility to Protect: Report of the International
Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty” (Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, December 2001).
22 Roland Paris, At War's End: Building Peace After Civil Conflict (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004); Michael Lund,
“Taking Stock of Post-Conflict Peacebuilding and Charting Future Directions,” in What Kind of Peace is Being Built? Reflections on
the State of Building Ten Years After The Agenda for Peace (Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, January 2003).
23 Paris, At War's End; James Dobbins et al., The UN's Role in Nation-Building: From the Belgian Congo to Iraq, vol. 2 of Rand's
History of Nation-Building (RAND National Defense Research Institute, forthcoming 2005).

Endnotes

21

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

24 A review of key policy documents by OECD DAC, the European Union, the United Nations, and other bilateral and multilateral
organizations reveals a shared analysis that peace, development, human rights, and democracy are interlinked, and need to be
pursued in tandem. These values are promoted and advanced not only as universally valid and desirable goals, but also as key
elements of an international conflict prevention and peacebuilding agenda. Collectively, they constitute a normative framework for
international action.
25 For a compelling case on the political dimension of peacebuilding, see Elizabeth Cousens and Chetan Kumar, with Karin
Wermester, eds., Peacebuilding as Politics: Cultivating Peace in Fragile Societies (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2001). For
an equally compelling argument on the role of non-governmental actors, see John Prendergast and Emily Plumb, “Building Local
Capacity: From Implementation to Peacebuilding,” in Stedman, et. al, eds., Ending Civil Wars.
26 Within the UN system, DPA has been designated the focal point for peacebuilding. However, the Peacebuilding Unit within DPA
which was recommended by the Brahimi Panel never came to life due to the opposition of certain UN member states.
27 During the Cold War, aid agencies had generally been linked to departments of foreign affairs and served as operational arms of
their governments' foreign policies. Nonetheless, aid programs were administered by development professionals with considerable
latitude in the design and delivery of humanitarian and socio-economic aid programs. Official aid agencies were generally averse to
dealing with political and security issues. Where there was conflict, they sought to minimize the impact of conflict on their programming but avoided dealing directly with conflict issues. When they could not continue their work in conflict, they interrupted their
development programming and provided humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance was intended to be short term and limited
in nature, while development aid was designed to support a longer-term strategy for socio-economic development through consultations with recipient governments. Neither of these forms of assistance was appropriate for post-conflict rebuilding which required
new types of programming—such as providing public security, consolidating political stability, promoting psycho-social reconciliation and initiating socio-economic rehabilitation—to meet immediate needs within a politically fragile context.
28 The development enterprise is, itself, the outgrowth of security concerns after World War II when the emergence of new states
threat was seen to raise the stakes vis-à-vis the Soviet bloc. Development was seen as an instrument to prevent the slide of developing
countries into the Soviet orbit.
29 World Bank Report of the Paris Meeting, available at <www.worldbank.org>.
30 The evolution of donor responses to the peacebuilding agenda needs to be understood within the context of the official aid system
that influences its constituent agencies. Official development assistance is highly decentralized, guided largely by the priorities of
donor governments, permanently under-resourced, and slow to change. Yet it is also highly responsive to peer influence. Innovations
by individual members as well as multilateral institutions have strong demonstration effects. This was indeed the case with postconflict peacebuilding where the work of a few key agencies and the OECD DAC had multiplier effects throughout the international
donor community.
31 GTZ, Joint Utstein Study.
32 The OECD DAC is the coordinating body for bilateral development donors with the aim of improving the effectiveness of development cooperation. It is a standard and norm setting body rather than an operational actor. Nonetheless, since its standards are considered binding by member states, OECD DAC has traditionally played an important role in influencing donor policies and behavior.
33 OECD, DAC Guidelines: Helping Prevent Violent Conflict (2001), and DAC Guidelines on Poverty Reduction (2001). Although the
DAC Task Force has since been discontinued, its successor, the Conflict, Peace and Development Co-operation (CPDC) Network of the
DAC, continues work on four related policy areas: security sector reform, mainstreaming conflict prevention, responding to crisis
country needs, and regional conflict dynamics.
34 Canadian International Development Agency, Compendium of Operational Frameworks for Peace Building and Donor Coordination
(Conflict Prevention and Post-Conflict Reconstruction [CPR Peacebuilding Network]). The Compendium encompasses diverse practice
areas such as gender and peacebuilding, security sector reform, transitional justice, child soldiers, peace and conflict impact assessment, and media and peacebuilding. See <www.cprnet.net>.

22

Endnotes

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

35 Shepard Forman and Dirk Salomons, “Meeting Essential Needs in Societies Emerging from Conflict,” paper prepared for the
Brookings Roundtable on the Relief to Development Gap (New York: Center on International Cooperation, n.d.); Shepard Forman and
Stewart Patrick, Good Intentions: Pledges of Aid for Post-Conflict Recovery (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2000).
36 OECD, “Security System Reform and Governance: Policy and Good Practice,” High Level Meeting, 15-16 April 2004.
37 James K Boyce, “The International Financial Institutions: Postconflict Reconstruction and Peacebuilding Capacities,” prepared for
the meeting on Strengthening the UN's Capacity on Civilian Crisis Management, Copenhagen, 8-9 June 2004. Forman and Patrick,
Good Intentions: Pledges of Aid for Post-Conflict Recovery. James Boyce, Investing in Peace: Aid and Conditionality after Civil Wars
(Oxford University Press, 2002)
38 Salvatore Schiavo-Campo, “Financing and Aid Management Arrangements in Post-Conflict Situations,” Working Paper No. 6
(Washington, D.C.: World Bank Conflict Prevention and Reconstruction Unit, 2003). Shepard Forman, Stewart Patrick, and Dirk
Salomons, “Recovering from Conflict: Strategy for An International Response,” in Paying For Essentials Policy Paper Series (New
York: New York University Center on International Cooperation, 2001).
39 World Bank, The Role of the World Bank in Conflict and Development: An Evolving Agenda (Washington, D.C.: World Bank Conflict
Prevention and Reconstruction Unit, 2003).
40 International Monetary Fund (IMF) website at <www.imf.org>. A recent IMF Working Paper from the Policy Development and
Review Department called “Economic Performance Over the Conflict Cycle,” prepared by Nicholas Staines, shows that the Fund is
engaging more actively on this issue. The paper finds “a significant shift in the economic characteristics of civil conflicts during
the1990s. Conflicts have become shorter but with more severe contractions and a stronger recovery of growth. …The stance of
macroeconomic policy was an important factor while the underlying “conflict process” remained unchanged.
41 For a quick review of the role of IFIs, see James Boyce, “The International Financial Institutions,” a paper prepared for CIC for the
Copenhagen Meeting, June 2004.
42 GTZ, Joint Utstein Study.
43 For selected documents, see: Robert C. Orr, Winning the Peace: An American Strategy for Post-Conflict Reconstruction
(Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic International Studies, 2004); WSP Bossey Statement at <www.wsp-international.org>; OECD,
DAC Guidelines; United Nations, Draft Plan of Action on Peacebuilding, 6 April 2001.
44 Nils Peter Gleditch et al., “Armed Conflict 1964-2001: A New Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research 39(5): 615-637; Monty Marshall
and Ted Robert Gurr, Peace and Conflict 2003: A Global Survey of Armed Conflicts, Self-Determination Movements and Democracy
(College Park, MD: Center for International Development and Conflict Management, 2003).
45 Paul Collier, Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2003).
46 The work of the Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict and IPA’s Conflict Prevention Program provide ample
evidence of this.
47 Ken Menkhaus, “Impact Assessment in Post-Conflict Peace-Building: The State of the Art,” a paper prepared for the War-Torn
Societies Project-International (April 2003); GTZ, Joint Utstein Study; Cheyanne Church and Julie Shouldice, The Evaluation of
Conflict Resolution Interventions: Framing the State of Play (Ulster: INCORE International Conflict Research, 2002); Chr. Michelsen
Institute, After War: Reconciliation and Democratization: Lessons Learned. Summary Report (Norway: Chr. Michelsen Institute, 2000).
48 For a rigorous examination of evaluation issues with a focus on peace implementation, see George Downs and Stephen John
Stedman’s chapter in Stedman et al., eds., Ending Civil Wars.

Endnotes

23

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

49 Several donor countries, most notably the Utstein-4 including Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and the UK as well as Sweden,
have started to undertake country-level evaluation of their peacebuilding programs. These evaluation studies assess the effectiveness
of the programs and projects of the donor country rather than their impact on the ground. For a useful review of evaluation studies,
see: Swedish Sida Evaluation 00/37 entitled “Assessment of Lessons Learned from Sida Support to Conflict Management and Peace
Building: State of the Art/Annotated Bibliography.”
50 Michael W. Doyle and Nicholas Sambanis, “International Peacebuilding: A Theoretical and Quantitative Analysis,” American
Political Science Review 94: 779.
51 Paris, At War's End, includes Angola, Rwanda, Cambodia, Liberia, Bosnia, Croatia, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Namibia
and Mozambique. Paris also reviewed three other cases (Kosovo, East Timor and Sierra Leone) which were launched after 1998. His
assessment of these operations, as well as in Afghanistan, is also fairly negative although on different grounds.
52 The case studies included Germany, Japan, Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq for the US led “nation-building”
projects and Congo, Namibia, El Salvador, Cambodia, Mozambique, Eastern Slavonia, Sierra Leone and East Timor for the UN-led
missions.
53 Dobbins et al., The UN's Role in Nation-Building: From the Belgian Congo to Iraq.
54 Ibid., p.xxi.
55 Ibid., p.xxiii.
56 The cases covered included Angola, Bosnia, Cambodia, Cyprus, Eastern Slavonia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Lebanon, Liberia,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Namibia, Rwanda, Somalia, Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe. Michael Lund, “Taking Stock of Post-Conflict
Peacebuilding and Charting Future Directions,” in What Kind of Peace is Being Built? Reflections on the State of Building Ten Years
After The Agenda for Peace (Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, January 2003).
57 Ibid., pp.30-31.
58 Stedman, et al., eds., Ending Civil Wars, makes the most convincing case about the importance of political will.
59 Chandra Sriram and Zoe Nielsen, eds., Exploring Subregional Conflict (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2004); Michael Pugh
and W.P.S. Sidhu, The United Nations and Regional Security: Europe and Beyond (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2003); Necla
Tschirgi, “A Regional Conflict Approach to Peacebuilding,” Journal of Peacebuilding and Development ( I:1, 2002).
60 Forman and Patrick, Good Intentions; Forman and Salomons, Meeting Essential Needs.
61 Uwe Kievelitz et al., “Practical Guide to Multilateral Needs Assessments in Post-Conflict Situations” (Washington, D.C.: World
Bank, August 2004).
62 Stephen John Stedman et al., eds., Ending Civil Wars: The Implementation of Peace Agreements (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner
Publishers, 2002).
63 Forman and Patrick, Good Intentions; Dirk Salomons and Dennis Dijkzeul, “The Conjurers' Hat: Financing United Nations Peacebuilding in Operations Directed by Special Representatives of the Secretary-General” (Oslo: Fafo Institute of Applied Social Science
and Center on International Cooperation, New York University, 2001); Collier, Breaking the Conflict Trap ; Boyce, “Strengthening the
UN's Capacity.”
64 Susan L.Woodward, “Peace Operations: the Civilian Dimension: Accounting for UNDP and the UN Specialized Agencies,” prepared
for the New York University Center on International Cooperation meeting on Strengthening the UN's Capacity on Civilian Crisis
Management, Copenhagen, 8-9 June 2004.

24

Endnotes

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

65 IPA's Economic Agendas in Civil Wars Project (EACW) generated a rich body of research on conflict trade which is accessible at
<www.ipacademy.org/programs>. Collier, Breaking the Conflict Trap .
66 OECD, DAC Guidelines.
67 Malone, The UN Security Council.
68 For an insightful account, see Michele Griffin, “The Helmet and the Hoe: Linkages Between United Nations Development
Assistance and Conflict Management,” Global Governance 9:2, 2003.
69 Simon Chesterman in You, the People raises the question as to whether it is possible to establish the conditions for legitimate and
sustainable national governance through a period of benevolent foreign autocracy which defines societal norms and values.
70 M. Duffield, Global Governance and the New Wars: The Merging of Development and Security (New York: Zed Books, 2001);
Alejandro Bendaña, “Critical Assessments from the South,” in What Kind of Peace is Being Built? Reflections on the State of Building
Ten Years After The Agenda for Peace (Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, January 2003).
71 James K. Boyce, Economic Policy for Building Peace: The Lessons of El Salvador (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1996).
72 Collier, Breaking the Conflict Trap .
73 Ibid.
74 Alvaro De Soto and Graciana del Castillo, “Obstacles to Peacebuilding,” Foreign Affairs 94 (spring 1994): 69-93
75 Tony Addison, “From Conflict to Reconstruction,” Discussion Paper No 2001/16 (UNU: WIDER, June 2001).
76 Eugenia Date-Bah, ed., Jobs After War: A Critical Challenge in the Peace and Reconstruction Puzzle. (Geneva: ILO, September
2003). Boyce, “The International Financial Institutions.”
77 There is, however, is a growing appreciation by various agencies of the need to ground economic policies in local realities. For
example, a recent World Bank commissioned study by Salvatore Schiavo-Campo entitled “Financing and Aid Management
Arrangements in Post-Conflict Situations” notes that the first lesson of experience for aid in post conflict situations is “the imperative of assuring robust linkages between the aid and the rebuilding of local institutions, and the core challenge of balancing
immediate reconstruction priorities with long-term institutional development.” Similarly, a recent World Bank publication entitled
“Practical Guide to Multilateral Needs Assessments in Post-Conflict Situations” argues that a multilateral needs assessment should be
seen as a “complex analytical process led by the national authorities and supported by the international community and carried out
by multilateral agencies on their behalf, with the closest possible collaboration of national stakeholders and civil society.”
78 Tony Addison, ed., From Conflict to Recovery in Africa (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003).
79 Karen Von Hippel, Democracy by Force: US Military Intervention in the Post-Cold War World (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2000); Krishna Kumar, ed., Post-Conflict Elections, Democratization & International Assistance (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner
Publishers, 1998); Bertrand Badie, The Imported State: The Westernization of Political Order, translated by Claudia Royal (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 2004).
80 See for example, Jeroen de Zeeuw, “Projects Do Not Create Institutions: The Record of Democracy Assistance in Post-Conflict
Societies,” a paper prepared for the UNU/WIDER Conference on Making Peace Work, June 2004.
81 Paris, At War's End.

Endnotes

25

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

82 See, for example: Sunil Bastian and Robin Luckham, Can Democracy be Designed? The Politics of Institutional Choice in Conflicttorn Societies (London: Zed Books, 2003); Von Hippel, Democracy by Force; William G. O'Neill, “International Human Rights
Assistance” (The Hague: Clingendael Institute, July 2003); Benjamin Reilly, “International Electoral Assistance” (The Hague:
Clingendael Institute, June 2003); Ross Howard, “International Media Assistance” (The Hague: Clingendael Institute, June 2003).
83 Swedish Sida Evaluation Studies; Clingendael Evaluation Studies.
84 Ibid.
85 Susan Woodward notes that “The entire corpus of learning about how to leave behind a functioning state and consolidate peace
is in conflict with decisions taken with little or no relation to developments at the country level.” Susan Woodward, “Peace
Operations: the Civilian Dimension: Accounting for UNDP and the UN Specialized Agencies,” p.13.
86 See the papers prepared by CIC for the Copenhagen Conference: Boyce, “The International Financial Institutions”; Durch,
“Strengthening the UN Capacity”; Forman, “Building Civilian Capacity”; Peter V. Jakobsen, “The Emerging EU Civilian Crisis
Management Capacity”; Woodward, “Peace Operations.”
87 De Zeeuw, “Projects Do Not Create Institutions.”
88 Ibid.
89 For a concise statement of the links between weak states and US National Security, see Center for Global Development, On the
Brink: Weak States and US National Security (Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development, 2004).
90 Dobbins et al., America's Role in Nation-Building; Dobbins et al., UN's Role in Nation Building; Orr, Winning the Peace; Center
for Global Development, On the Brink.
91 Orr, Winning the Peace, p.7.

26

Endnotes

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Selected Bibliography
Addison, Tony, ed. From Conflict to Recovery in Africa (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003).
Anderson, Mary. Do No Harm (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1999).
Anderson, Mary, and Lara Olson. Confronting War: Critical Lessons For Peace Practitioners (Cambridge, MA: The Collaborative for
Development Action, 2003).
Australian Agency for International Development. “Peace, Conflict and Development Policy” (Canberra: AusAID, June 2002).
Badie, Bertrand. The Imported State: The Westernization of Political Order, translated by Claudia Royal (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 2004).
Bastian, Sunil, and Robin Luckham. Can Democracy Be Designed? The Politics of Institutional Choice in Conflict-Torn Societies
(London: Zed Books Ltd., 2003).
Bendaña, Alejandro. “Critical Assessments from the South,” in What Kind of Peace is Being Built? Reflections on the State of Building
Ten Years After The Agenda for Peace (Ottawa: International Development Research Centre (IDRC), January 2003).
Boyce, James K. “The International Financial Institutions: Postconflict Reconstruction and Peacebuilding Capacities,” prepared for the
New York University Center on International Cooperation meeting on Strengthening the UN's Capacity on Civilian Crisis Management
(Copenhagen, 8-9 June 2004).
_____. Investing in Peace: Aid and Conditionality after Civil Wars (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
_____. Economic Policy for Building Peace: The Lessons of El Salvador (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1996).
Bray, John. “MIGA's Experience in Conflict-Affected Countries: The Case of Bosnia and Herzegovina” (Washington, D.C.: World Bank
Conflict Prevention and Reconstruction Unit, June 2004).
Canadian International Development Agency. Compendium of Operational Frameworks for Peace Building and Donor Coordination
(Conflict Prevention and Post-Conflict Reconstruction [CPR Peacebuilding Network], available at <http://www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/peace>.
Canadian International Development Agency website, <http://www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/index-e.htm>.
Cater, Charles. “The Regionalization of Conflict and Intervention,” IPA New York Seminar (West Point, NY: 5-9 May 2003).
Cawthra, Gavin, and Robin Luckham. Governing Insecurity: Democratic Control of Military and Security Establishments in
Transitional Democracies (London: Zed Books Ltd., 2003).
Center for Global Development. On the Brink: Weak States and U.S. National Security (Washington, D.C.: Center for Global
Development, 2004).
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) and the Association of the United States Army (AUSA). “Post-Conflict
Reconstruction: Task Framework” (May 2002), <http://www.csis.org/isp/pcr/framework.pdf>.
Chesterman, Simon. You, the People: The United Nations, Transitional Administration, and State-Building (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2004).
Church, Cheyanne, and Julie Shouldice. The Evaluation of Conflict Resolution Interventions: Framing the State of Play (Ulster: INCORE
International Conflict Research, 2002).
Chr. Michelsen Institute. “After War: Reconciliation and Democratization in Divided Societies—Lessons Learned,” Summary Report
(Bergen: Chr. Michelsen Institute 2000).
Collier, Paul. Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy, (Washington D.C.: World Bank, 2003).
Cousens, Elizabeth, and Chetan Kumar, with Karin Wermester, eds. Peacebuilding as Politics: Cultivating Peace in Fragile Societies,
(Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2001).

Selected Bibliography

27

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Dahrendorf, Nicola, et al. “A Review of Peace Operations: A Case for Change” (London: International Policy Unit, Kings College,
March 2003).
Date-Bah, Eugenia, ed. Jobs After War: A Critical Challenge in the Peace and Reconstruction Puzzle (Geneva: ILO, September 2003).
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit. Joint Utstein Study of Peacebuilding: National Report on Germany, (Eschborn:
[GTZ] GmbH, 2003).
_____. “Peace-building, Crisis Prevention and Conflict Management: Technical Cooperation in the Context of Crises, Conflicts and
Disasters” (Eschborn: [GTZ] GmbH, 2002).
Dobbins, James, et al. The UN's Role in Nation-Building: From the Belgian Congo to Iraq, Volume 2 in Rand's History of NationBuilding (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, forthcoming 2005).
_____. America's Role in Nation-Building: From Germany to Iraq (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2003).
Douma, P.S. The Political Economy of Internal Conflict: A Comparative Analysis of Angola, Colombia, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka
(The Hague: Netherlands Institute of Internaitonal Relations Clingendael, 2003).
Duffield, M. Global Governance and the New Wars: The Merging of Development and Security (New York: Zed Books Ltd., 2001).
Durch William J. “Strengthening UN Secretariat Capacity for Civilian Post-Conflict Response,” prepared for the New York University
Center on International Cooperation meeting on Strengthening the UN's Capacity on Civilian Crisis Management (Copenhagen, 8-9
June 2004).
Durch, William J., et al. The Brahimi Report and the Future of UN Peace Operations (Washington, D.C.: The Henry J. Stimson Center,
2003).
Forman, Shepard. “Building Civilian Capacity for Conflict Management and Sustainable Peace,” prepared for the New York University
Center on International Cooperation meeting on Strengthening the UN's Capacity on Civilian Crisis Management (Copenhagen, 8-9
June 2004).
Forman, Shepard, and Dirk Salomons. “Meeting Essential Needs in Societies Emerging from Conflict,” paper prepared for the
Brookings Roundtable on the Relief to Development Gap (New York: Center on International Cooperation, n.d).
Forman, Shepard, and Stewart Patrick. Good Intentions: Pledges of Aid for Post-Conflict Recovery, Center on International
Cooperation Studies in Multilateralism (Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers, 2000).
Forman, Shepard, Stewart Patrick, and Dirk Salomons. “Recovering from Conflict: Strategy for An International Response,” Paying
For Essentials Policy Paper Series, (New York: New York University Center on International Cooperation, n.d), available at
<http://www.nyu.edu/pages/cic/pdf/Recovering%20From%20Conflict.pdf>.
Fukuyama, Francis. State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st Century (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004).
_____. “Nation-Building 101,” The Atlantic Monthly 293, No. 1 (January/February 2001).
Gaigals, C., with M. Leonhardt. Conflict-Sensitive Approaches to Development: A Review of Practice (London: International Alert &
International Development Research Centre, 2001), available at <http://www.international-alert.org/pdf/pubdev/develop.pdf>.
Galama, Anneke, and Paul van Tongeren, eds. Towards Better Peacebuilding Practice: On Lessons Learned, Evaluation Practice and
Aid & Conflict (Utrecht: European Centre for Conflict Prevention, 2002).
Goodhand, J., with P. Atkinson. Conflict and Aid: Enhancing the Peacebuilding Impact of International Engagement: A Synthesis of
Findings from Afghanistan, Liberia and Sri Lanka (London: International Alert, 2001).
Government of Canada Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, “Report on Canada's Human Security Program 200001 and 2001-02” (Ottawa: DFAIT).
_____.“Freedom from Fear: Canada's Foreign Policy for Human Security” (Ottawa: DFAIT, 2002).

28

Selected Bibliography

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Government of Canada Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade website, <http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca>.
Griffin, M. “The Helmet and the Hoe: Linkages Between United Nations Development Assistance and Conflict Management,” Global
Governance 9, no.2 (2003).
Harris, Peter, and Ben Reilly. Democracy and Deep-Rooted Conflict: Options for Negotiators, International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance (Stockholm: International IDEA, 1998).
Howard, Ross. “International Media Assistance” (The Hague: Clingendael Institute, June 2003).
_____. “International Media Assistance. A Review of Donor Activities and Lessons Learned,” CRU Working Paper 19 (The Hague:
Netherlands Institute of International Relations Clingendael, 2003).
Humphreys, Macartan. “Economics and Violent Conflict,” Human Security Bulletin: The Canadian Consortium on Human Security 1,
No. 3 (October 2003).
International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS). “The Responsibility to Protect: Report of the International
Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty” (Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, December 2001),
<http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/iciss-ciise/pdf/Commission-Report.pdf>.
International Development Research Center (IDRC) website, <www.idrc.org>.
International Monetary Fund website, <www.imf.org>.
Jakobsen, Peter V. “The Emerging EU Civilian Crisis Management Capacity: A ‘Real Added Value' for the UN?” prepared for the New
York University Center on International Cooperation meeting on Strengthening the UN's Capacity on Civilian Crisis Management,
Copenhagen, 8-9 June 2004.
Kaldor, Mary. New and Old Wars: Organized Violence in a Global Era (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).
Kievelitz, Uwe, et al. “Practical Guide to Multilateral Needs Assessments in Post-Conflict Situations,” Paper No. 15 (Washington, DC.:
World Bank, August 2004).
Klingebiel, Stephan, and Katja Roehder, “Development-Military Interfaces: New Challenges in Crises and Post-Conflict Situations”
(Bonn: German Development Institute, 2004).
Klingebiel, Stephan. “Impact of Development Cooperation in Conflict Situations: Cross-section Report on Evaluations of German
Development Cooperation in Six Countries” (Berlin: German Development Institute, 1999).
Kreimer, A., et al. The World Bank's Experience with Post-Conflict Reconstruction (Washington, DC.: World Bank, 1998).
Kumar, Krishna, ed. Post-Conflict Elections, Democratization & International Assistance (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers,
1998).
_____, ed. Rebuilding Societies After Civil War: Critical Roles for International Assistance (Boulder CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers,
1997).
Leonhardt, M. Conflict Impact Assessment of EU Development Co-operation with ACP Countries: A Review of Literature and Practice
(London: International Alert & Saferworld, 2000).
Lund, Michael. “Taking Stock of Post-Conflict Peacebuilding and Charting Future Directions,” in What Kind of Peace is Being Built?
Reflections on the State of Building Ten Years After The Agenda for Peace (Ottawa: International Development Research Centre,
January 2003).
Lund, M., and G. Rasmoelina, eds. The Impact of Conflict Prevention Policy: Cases, Measures and Assessments. SWP-Conflict
Prevention Network Yearbook 1999/2000 (London: International Alert and Saferworld, 2000).
Malone, David M. The UN Security Council: From the Cold War to the 21st Century (Boulder: CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2004).
Martin, Ian. Self-Determination in East Timor: The United Nations, the Ballot, and International Intervention (Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner Publishers, 2001).

Selected Bibliography

29

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Mehler, A., and C. Ribaux. Crisis Prevention and Conflict Management in Technical Cooperation: An Overview of the National and
International Debate (Eschborn, Germany: Deutsche Gessellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit [GTZ], 2000).
Neild, Rachel. “Democratic Police Reforms in War-Torn Societies,” Conflict, Security and Development 1, no.1: 21-43.
Nyheim, D., et al. Development in Conflict: A Seven Steps Tool for Planners (London: FEWER, International Alert & Saferworld, 2001).
O'Neill, William G. “International Human Rights Assistance: A Review of Donor Activities and Lessons Learned,” Working Paper No.
18 (The Hague: Netherlands Institute for International Relations Clingendael, 2003).
_____. Kosovo: An Unfinished Peace (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2002).
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. “Security System Reform and Governance: Policy and Good Practice,”
Development Co-Operation Directorate Development Assistance Commitee [DAC/DAC] High Level Meeting, 15-16 April 2004.
_____. DAC Guidelines: Helping Prevent Violent Conflict (2001), available at <http://www.gtz.de/security-sector/download/DAC_
Guidelines.pdf>.
______. DAC Guidelines on Poverty Reduction (2001), available at <http://www1.oecd.org/dac/pdf/G-pov-ex.pdf>.
Orr, Robert C. Winning the Peace: An American Strategy for Post-Conflict Reconstruction (Washington D.C.: Center for Strategic
International Studies, 2004).
Paris, Roland. At War's End: Building Peace After Civil Conflict (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
_____. “International Peacebuilding and the 'Mission Civilisatrice',” Review of International Studies 28 (October 2002).
Pugh, M., and W.P.S. Sidhu, eds. The United Nations and Regional Security: Europe and Beyond (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner
Publishers, 2003).
Reilly, Benjamin. “International Electoral Assistance: A Review of Donor Activities and Lessons Learned,” Working Paper 17 (The
Hague: Netherlands Institute for International Relations Clingendael, 2003).
Salomons, Dirk, and Dennis Dijkzeul. “The Conjurers' Hat: Financing United Nations Peace-building in Operations Directed by Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General,” (Oslo: Fafo Institute of Applied Social Science and Center on International Cooperation,
New York University, 2001).
Schiavo-Campo, Salvatore. “Financing and Aid Management Arrangements in Post-Conflict Situations,” Working Paper No. 6
(Washington, D.C.: World Bank Conflict Prevention and Reconstruction Unit, 2003).
Smith, Dan. “Getting Their Act Together: Toward a Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding,” synthesis report of the Joint Utstein Study
of Peacebuilding (Oslo: The Royal Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, November 2003).
Søbøm, Gunnar M., et al. Norwegian Assistance to Countries in Conflict: The Lesson of Experience from Guatemala, Mali,
Mozambique, Sudan, Rwanda and Burundi (Oslo: The Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 1998).
Sriram, Chandra L., and Zoe Nielsen, eds. Exploring Subregional Conflict: Opportunities for Conflict Prevention (Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner Publishers, 2004).
Stedman, Steve, et al., eds., Ending Civil Wars: The Implementation of Peace Agreements (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers,
2002).
Stewart, Frances. “Conflict and the Millennium Development Goals,” Journal of Human Development 4, iss. 3.
Stiefel, Matthias. “UNDP in Conflicts and Disasters: An Overview of the “Continuum Project,” UNDP Project INT/93/709 (Geneva:
August 1994).
Swedish Government Offices. “Shared Responsibility: An Integrated Policy for Global Development” (Swedish Government Offices,
September 2003), available at <http://www.sweden.se/upload/Sweden_se/english/publications/RK/PDF/RK_Shared_responsability.
pdf>.

30

Selected Bibliography

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

______. “Assessment of Lessons Learned From Sida Support to Conflict Management and Peace Building” (Stockholm: SIDA, 2000).
UK Government Department for International Development (DFID) website, <http://www.dfid.gov.uk>.
UK Government Department for International Development, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, “The Global Conflict Prevention
Pool: A Joint UK Government Approach to Reducing Conflict” (London: DFID, August 2003).
United Nations website, <www.un.org>.
_____. “United Nations Plan of Action on Peacebuilding” (6 April 2001).
_____. “Report of the UNDG-ECHA Working Group on Transition Issues” (December 2003 or February 2004).
_____. An Agenda for Development: Report of the Secretary-General, UN Doc A/48/935 (6 May 1994), available at
<http://www.un.org/Docs/SG/agdev.html>.
_____, An Agenda for Peace: Preventive Diplomacy, Peacemaking and Peace-keeping (Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to the
statement adopted by the Summit Meeting of the Security Council on 31 January 1992), UN Doc A/47/277-S/2411 (17 June 1992),
available at <http://www.un.org/Docs/SG/agpeace.html>.
_____. Handbook on United Nations Multidimensional Peacekeeping Operations (New York: United Nations, 2003).
_____. Prevention of Armed Conflict: Report of the Secretary-General, UN Doc A/55/985-S/2001/574 (7 June 2001), available at
<http://ods-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N01/404/64/PDF/N0140464.pdf?OpenElement>.
_____. Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (Brahimi Report), UN Doc A/55/305-S/2000/809 (21 August 2000),
available at <http://www.un.org/peace/reports/peace_operations/>.
_____. Report of the Secretary-General on the Implementation of the Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations,
A/55/502 (20 October 2000), available at <http://www.un.org/peace/reports/peace_operations/docs/55_502e.pdf>.
_____. Review of Technical Cooperation in the United Nations (Report of the Secretary-General), UN Doc A/58/382 (19 September
2003), available at <http://www.un.org/ga/58/documentation/list3.html>.
_____. Supplement to An Agenda for Peace: Position Paper of the Secretary-General on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of
the United Nations, UN Doc A/50/60-S/1995/1 (3 January 1995), available at <http://www.un.org/documents/ga/docs/50/
plenary/a50-60.htm>.
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations. “Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration of Ex-Combatants in a
Peacekeeping Environment: Principles and Guidelines” (New York: DPKO, December 1999).
United Nations Development Programme. “Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery, Introductory Kit,” 2003.
US Agency for International Development (USAID) website, <www.usaid.gov>.
Uvin, Peter. “The Development/Peacebuilding Nexus: A Typology and History of Changing Paradigms,” Journal of Peacebuilding and
Development 1, no.1 (2002).
_____. “The Influence of Aid in Situations of Violent Conflict,” prepared for the Development Assistance Committee Informal Task
Force on Conflict, Peace, and Development Co-operation (Paris: OECD, 1999).
Von Hippel, K. Democracy by Force: US Military Intervention in the Post-Cold War World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2000).
Waller, Peter. “Lessons Learned from Evaluations: Findings from a Recent Evaluation of German Development Co-Operation in
Conflict Situations in Six Countries,” prepared for the seminar on After War Reconciliation and Democratisation in Divided Societies—
Lessons Learned (Solstrand, Norway: 27-29 March 2000).
Walter, B. F., and J. Snyder, eds. Civil Wars, Insecurity, and Intervention (New York: Columbia University Press, 1999).

Selected Bibliography

31

POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING REVISITED: ACHIEVEMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CHALLENGES

Wartorn Societies Project website, <www.wsp-international.org>.
Wood, Bernard. “Development Dimensions of Conflict Prevention and Peace-Building” (Ottawa: UNDP Emergency Response Division,
June 2001).
Woodward, Susan L. “Peace Operations: the Civilian Dimension: Accounting for UNDP and the UN Specialized Agencies,” prepared
for the New York University Center on International Cooperation meeting on Strengthening the UN's Capacity on Civilian Crisis
Management, Copenhagen, 8-9 June 2004.
World Bank. The Role of the World Bank in Conflict and Development: An Evolving Agenda (Washington, D.C.: World Bank: Conflict
Prevention and Reconstruction Unit, 2004).
_____. “Building Capacity in Post-Conflict Countries,” Social Development Notes No. 14 (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, December
2003).
_____. “Conflict-Affected Countries: A Comprehensive Development Framework Approach” (Washington, D.C.: World Bank,
September 2003).
_____. “Development Cooperation and Conflict: The World Bank in Conflict-Affected Countries” (February 2003).
_____. Post-Conflict Reconstruction: The Role of the World Bank (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1998).
_____. Conflict Prevention and Post-Conflict Reconstruction Network, available at <http://www.worldbank.org/peacebuilding>.
World Bank Group website, <www.worldbank.org>.
Zeeuw, Jeroen de. “How to Make Democracy Assistance More Effective: Recommendations for Doing it Differently,” in Enhancing the
European Profile in Democracy Assistance (The Hague: Netherlands Institute for International Relations Clingendael, 2004).
_____. “Projects Do Not Create Institutions: The Record of Democracy Assistance in Post-Conflict Societies,” prepared for UNU/WIDER
conference on Making Peace Work, Helsinki, 4-5 June 2004.

32

Selected Bibliography

International Peace Academy

WSP International

777 United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017-3521
Tel: (212) 687-4300
Fax: (212) 983-8246
www.ipacademy.org

International Environment House 2
Chemin de Balexert 7-9
1219 Chatelaine-Geneva
Switzerland
Tel: +41 22 917 85 93
Fax: +41 22 917 80 39
info@wsp-international.org
http://wsp.dataweb.ch

