Pre-Conditions
for Peace
A Civil Society Perspective
on the Cyprus problem

Zenonas Tziarras

PCC REPORT 1/2018

About the Author
Zenonas Tziarras is a Post-Doctoral Researcher at the University of Cyprus. He holds a BA in
Mediterranean Studies and International Relations from the University of the Aegean (Greece),
an MA in International Relations and Strategic Studies from the University of Birmingham (UK),
and a PhD in Politics and International Studies from the University of Warwick (UK). He has
worked as adjunct lecturer at the University of Cyprus, UCLan Cyprus and the University of
Warwick, and collaborated with a number of think tanks in Cyprus and abroad on matters
pertaining to foreign policy, international security, Turkey, the Middle East and the Eastern
Mediterranean. Moreover, Zenonas has attended specialization courses in International Security
at the University of Delhi, India, training courses in Leadership and Conflict Resolution at Koç
University, Turkey, and has a certificate in Conflict Management & Mediation Skills.
He is a member in the editorial board of New Middle Eastern Studies and, among other
publications, the co-author of Turkey in the Eastern Mediterranean: Ideological Aspects of Foreign
Policy [in Greek].

PRE-CONDITIONS FOR PEACE:
A Civil Society Perspective
on the Cyprus Problem

Zenonas Tziarras

Report 1/2018

Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO)
Hausmanns gate 7
PO Box 9229 Oslo
NO-0134 OSLO, Norway
Tel. +47 22 54 77 00
Fax +47 22 54 77 01
Email: info@prio.no
Web: www.prio.no

PRIO encourages its researchers and research affiliates to publish their work in peer reviewed journals
and book series, as well as in PRIO’s own Report, Paper and Policy Brief series. In editing these series, we
undertake a basic quality control, but PRIO does not as such have any view on political issues. We
encourage our researchers actively to take part in public debates and give them full freedom of opinion.
The responsibility and honour for the hypotheses, theories, findings and views expressed in our
publications thus rests with the authors themselves.

© Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO), 2018
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or utilized in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without permission
in writing from the copyright holder(s).

ISBN 978-82-7288-878-6 (online)

Production and Cover design: Crystal Graphics

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................................. 1
TRACK II DIPLOMACY AND PRO-PEACE CIVIL SOCIETY IN CYPRUS ................................................. 3
CONTEMPORARY CASE STUDIES OF PRO-PEACE CIVIL SOCIETY ..................................................... 6
MEASURING CIVIL SOCIETY SUCCESS .................................................................................................... 20
CONCLUSIONS:
PRE-CONDITIONS FOR AN INCLUSIVE PEACE PROCESS AND SUSTAINABLE PEACE................. 24

1

INTRODUCTION

T

he Cyprus Problem has dominated much of Cyprus’s contemporary history. The
country’s past experiences under the rule of the Ottoman Empire (1571-1878) and
British colonialism (1878-1960) complicated communal relations on the Island and
gave rise to rival ethno-nationalisms, i.e., Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot. The declaration
of Cyprus’s independence in 1960 only made things worse, with ethnic strife breaking out in
1963 and continuing on and off until 1974. After a coup by the Greek Junta, which took place
with the support of the Greek-Cypriot nationalist organization EOKA B’, Turkey, in the
summer of 1974, responded militarily, forcefully dividing Cyprus and gaining control of 37%
of the island's north, a situation that exists to this day. In 1983 Turkish-Cypriots unilaterally
declared their independence but were recognized only by Turkey. On the other hand, the
Republic of Cyprus, the only internationally recognized government on the Island, has been
controlled only by Greek-Cypriots since 1964.
As such, the country has been de facto divided with almost no contact between the two
communities since 1974. In April 2003 this changed when the first crossing checkpoint was
opened across the Buffer Zone (or the “Green Line”) in the heart of Nicosia, the capital city. This
was one year prior to the referenda for the United Nation’s (UN) peace plan (the “Annan Plan”)1
and the Republic of Cyprus’s accession to the European Union (EU). The opening of the first
crossing raised expectations for a more peaceful future and heightened prospects for
reconciliation between the two communities through the increase of inter-communal
contact. Inevitably it also strengthened the role of pro-peace civil society, not least because
of the expected referenda and the prospects for peace.
To be sure, pro-peace and reconciliation civil society initiatives existed before as well.
However, they were mostly “focused on offering opportunities to members of the communities to develop face-to-face communication and conflict resolution skills.” 2 Since the

1
2

The Annan Plan was voted for by the Turkish-Cypriots with 64.9 percent and was rejected by the Greek-Cypriots with
75.8 percent.
Bülent Kanol and İlke Dağli, “Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus: Peace-Ing It Together at the Grassroots
“in Contemporary Social and Political Aspects of the Cyprus Problem, ed. Jonathan Warner, David W. Lovell, and Michalis
Kontos (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2016), 270-71.

2

Pre-Conditions for Peace

1990s and more so in the 2000s and 2010s, the importance and role of civil society in relation
to the Cyprus peace process increased to a great extent. However, one could argue that civil
society mobilization in this respect remained in many ways limited and, therefore, without
much impact, be it in terms of Track l negotiations, inter-communal reconciliation, or the
development of what is often called a “culture of peace.”
Against the background of civil society’s growing role since the early 2000s, this report
aims to track the progress or lack thereof, and identify the limitations and prospects of propeace grassroots mobilization in Cyprus. It does so by looking at rather recent – structured as
well as decentralized – civil society initiatives. At the same time, the analysis also takes into
account public opinion polls and events that took place over the past few years. Subsequently,
the report proceeds to propose ways through which these limitations could be overcome,
both at the grassroots level and with the involvement of official political actors.
The report starts by briefly conceptualizing the role of Track II Diplomacy and civil society
in the context of peace-building and conflict resolution in general and the Cyprus Problem
in particular. The section that follows focuses on three contemporary case studies of propeace civil society in Cyprus: The Home for Cooperation, Cyprus Dialogue Forum and United
Cyprus Now. Each case study provides a different perspective of pro-peace civil society
mobilization. The Home for Cooperation (H4C) is looked at as one of the older and main
initiatives given that it functions as a meeting space that hosts other pro-peace civil society
organizations and initiatives as well. The Cyprus Dialogue Forum (CDF) is examined as probably
the biggest, most ambitious and most structured platform of multi-segment inter-communal
dialogue thus far. As analysed below, the CDF could be also seen as a Track 1.5 initiative as
opposed to a more traditional Track II one, which is an important particularity. The Unite Cyprus
Now (UCN) initiative is quite different to the previous two in that it emerged rather
spontaneously at the grassroots level, with extensive use of social media, and it still remains
largely decentralized.
The report then assesses the success, limitations and potential of those pro-peace
initiatives and, in the final section, lists a number of pre-conditions that need to be pursued
at the grassroots and official levels for a more impactful approach to peace-building and
reconciliation.3 It is ultimately argued that, in addition to efforts that should be made by civil
society towards a more inclusive and effective grassroots movement, Track I has the important
responsibility to provide the space to civil society that allows it to be empowered and be part
of the solution, both in term of improving everyday inter-communal relations as well as
supporting the official peace process.

3

It should be clarified that the report’s focus on the role of civil society does not suggest that there are not any other
factors at play when it comes to the resolution of the Cyprus Problem. A holistic approach to the resolution of the
conflict should take into account intra-communal dynamics, international politics and the role of external powers, such
as Turkey, Greece, the United Kingdom, Russia and the United States, as well. However, no settlement can be achieved
or sustained unless the two communities work together for a common future – and civil society can play a central role
in this process.

3

TRACK II DIPLOMACY AND
PRO-PEACE CIVIL SOCIETY IN CYPRUS

S

econd-Track Diplomacy (or Track II Diplomacy) constitutes one of many conflict
resolution (or conflict management) methods, especially in complex conflict settings
that involve non-state actors – i.e., identity or other communal groups. According to
John Davies and Edy Kaufman,4 Track II Diplomacy can be defined as:
the bringing together of professionals, opinion leaders or other currently or potentially
influential individuals from communities in conflict, without official representative
status, to work together to understand better the dynamics underlying the conflict
and how its transformation from violence (or potential violence) to a collaborative
process of peace building and sustainable development might be promoted.
In short, Track II Diplomacy is about the role of civil society. It is the unofficial, grassroots
level, which nonetheless aspires to establish linkages with the official level and thus influence
Track I opinions. As Edward Azar notes, “The participation of individuals in their personal
capacities, and yet with access and potential to influence decision makers, is a useful
supplement to the work of professional diplomats and political leadership, while also
facilitating discussion at the grassroots level.”5 International organizations and states, not to
mention the academic community, have been attributing increasing importance to the role
of civil society in peacekeeping, peace-building and conflict resolution.6

4

5
6

John Davies and Edy Kaufman, “Second Track/Citizens’ Diplomacy: An Overview,” in Second Track/Citizens’ Diplomacy:
Concepts and Techniques for Conflict Transformation, ed. John L. Davies and Edward (Edy) Kafuman (Lanham, Boulder,
New York and Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2003), 2.
Edward Azar, “Protracted Social Conflicts and Second Track Diplomacy,” ibid., ed. John Davies and Edward (Edy)
Kaufman, 23.
Tamara Kool, “The Role of Civil Society in Peacekeeping Missions,” UNU-Merit (2016),
https://www.merit.unu.edu/the-role-of-civil-society-in-peacekeeping-missions/; John L. Davies and Edward (Edy)
Kaufman, eds., Second Track/Citizens’ Diplomacy: Concepts and Techniques for Conlict Tranformation (Lanham, Boulder,
New York and Oxford:: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2003).

4

Pre-Conditions for Peace

This role is played by various civil society actors, often called Civil Society Organizations (CSOs).
According to OECD-DAC’s 2008 Advisory Group on Civil Society and Aid Effectiveness, CSOs:
include all nonmarket and non-state organizations outside of the family in which
people organize themselves to pursue shared interests in the public domain…
Examples include community-based organizations and village associations, environmental groups, women’s rights groups, farmers’ associations, faith-based organizations,
labour unions, cooperatives, professional associations, chambers of commerce,
independent research institutes, and the not-for-profit media.7
The Advisory Group acknowledges that “civil society” is a broader concept but specifies
that CSOs can be “agents of change and development.” Such organizations can play multiple
roles that other actors would not be able to in conflict or post-conflict contexts. Their existence
alone testifies to a healthy democratic system where civilians can mobilize and freely pursue
and advocate for their rights and interests. Thereby they fill the gaps that are created because
of state inabilities or unwillingness and exercise bottom-up pressures on their governments.
The Advisory Group lists a number of roles that CSOs can play, such as the mobilization of
grassroots communities, the engagement in research and policy dialogue, building networks
for better civil society coordination and impact, educating the public, and helping to shape
social values such as solidarity and social justice.8
From this perspective, the role of civil society – and Track II Diplomacy more specifically –
is instrumental. Cyprus has itself witnessed significant expansion in civil society mobilization
and proliferation of CSOs particularly since the early 2000s. This is the case with regard to propeace CSOs as well. Many civil society initiatives have been undertaken since then, aimed at
building peace and trust between the two communities as well as promoting communication
and interaction to cultivate a culture of peace.9 The absence of a vibrant civil society and
intergroup contact in previous years has been linked to a “democratic deficit” and partially
blamed for the limited results of peace-building.10 Furthermore, much of the CSOs’ activities
are based, to one degree or another, on Gordon Allport’s Intergroup Contact Theory, which
contends that increased interpersonal contact reduces prejudice between groups and

Réal Lavergne, ed. Advisory Group on Civil Society and Aid Effectiveness: Synthesis of Findings and Recommendations,
2nd ed. (Canada: OECD-DAC, 2008), 7.
8 Ibid., 8.
9 Nicolas Stephane Jarraud and Alexandros Lordos, “Participatory Approaches to Environmental Conflict Resolution in
Cyprus,” Conflict Resolution Quarterly 29, no. 3 (2012).
10 Nicolas Jarraud, Christopher Louise, and Giorgos Filippou, “The Cypriot Civil Society Movement: A Legitimate Player
in the Peace Process?,” Jounral of Peacebuilding & Development 8, no. 1 (2013).
7

Track II Diplomacy and Pro-Peace Civil Society in Cyprus

5

contributes towards reconciliation.11 The fact that such contact was not possible prior to
2003 had greatly limited the prospects for reconciliation and successful resolution of the
Cyprus Problem. After all, it has been argued that without “civic ownership of the settlement
and convergence at the grassroots level, then there is no firm ground on which to build a
sustainable peace, endangering the very stability and implementation of any peace
agreement.”12
The evolution of Cypriot civil society and the increasing inter-communal contact after
2003 have – generally speaking – had a positive impact on inter-communal relations and,
theoretically, on the expectations for a settlement as well.13 However, a settlement has not yet
been reached – despite the momentum that was created in the peace talks between 2015
and 2017 and the boost to grassroots mobilization. In hindsight, one could argue that civil
society initiatives have managed to produce at least some positive results on the grassroots
level but have not been able to effectively pressure the official level towards a settlement. In
what follows, I look at civil society achievements and limitations both on the grassroots and
official levels through the lens of the three CSO case studies: The H4C, CDF and UCN.

See, Gordon Allport, The Nature of Prejudice, 3rd ed. (New York: Perseus Books, 1979); Thomas F. Pettigrew, “Intergroup
Contact Theory,” Annual Review of Psychology 49 (1998).
12 Kanol and Dağli, 265.
13 Norman Gillespie, Vasiliki Georgiou, and Sevinc Insay, “Civil Society and Trust Building in Cyprus,” Development in
Practice 23, no. 8 (2013).

11

6

CONTEMPORARY CASE STUDIES
OF PRO-PEACE CIVIL SOCIETY

A

gainst the background of growing inter-communal communication after the 2003
opening of the Ledra Palace crossing, CSOs and pro-peace civil society initiatives
gradually multiplied, not least because of international financial support that
sought to capitalize on the new dynamic and the prospects for settlement. The CSOs
examined in this report emerged during this post-2003 period and they are all of bicommunal character – i.e., they are run by both Greek-Cypriots and Turkish-Cypriots. This
section aims not to record in detail the history and operations of each CSO case study but
rather to provide insight on the context in which they operate, their goals, strengths, weaknesses and success in order to identify the problems that have restricted pro-peace civil
society from having a big enough and decisive impact on the peace process.
Information about these organizations or initiatives has been gathered from publically
available primary/secondary sources and personal interviews with key persons within them.
As already mentioned, these three civil society initiatives were chosen because of their
different operational nature, which allows us to look at grassroots mobilization and effectiveness from different perspectives, thus providing a more well-rounded understanding.
Moreover, comparing and contrasting the different experiences of the three initiatives will
enable us to identify potential gaps and spaces for improvement. The analysis starts with the
H4C, continues with the CDF and finishes with UCN.

Home for Cooperation (H4C)
The Home for Cooperation – “H4C” or “The Home” as is often referred to – was created in the
aftermath of the 2003 opening of the first crossing. The idea was initially conceived in 2005
by the Association for Historical Dialogue and Research (AHDR)14 and was about “establishing

14

The Association for Historical Dialogue and Research is comprised of educators and researchers who have an interest
in “the teaching and learning of history.” Since its establishment in 2003 it has organized several projects and activities;
among other things, it has trained teachers and produced supplementary teaching materials. For more information
see: http://www.ahdr.info/home.php.

Contemporary Cases Studies of Pro-Peace Civil Society

7

an inter-communal educational centre in the buffer zone.”15 In 2007 the project gained the
support of UNFICYP and later, in 2009, it received financial support from the European
Economic Area Grants and Norway Grants. In 2010 renovation works began on a building
located in the Buffer Zone opposite the historic Ledra Palace hotel, and in May 2011 the Home
was officially opened. As H4C’s website notes, “The unique four-day celebration marking the
inauguration of the Home showcases the collective efforts of civil society organizations across
Cyprus, with musical performances, sports events, art exhibitions, a symposium and film
screenings.”16
Today, H4C functions as a community centre or a “hub that facilitates and accommodates”
the activities of other bi-communal CSOs as well.17 According to its website, it is: “A lively
community centre providing opportunities to young people, the general public, activists,
educators and other agents of change to develop knowledge and critical thinking through
diverse and rich cultural, artistic and educational programs.”18 It hosts a number of other
organizations that are active on both sides (that is, they have their offices in The Home), while
it is also a place where other organizations can hold activities;19 it is a meeting place for actors
coming from the two sides of the divide. From this perspective, H4C aspires to become a
catalyst for cooperation between the two communities as well as between organizations – a
hub for making introductions.20
This approach falls within a broader philosophy and framework of operations based on
H4C’s aim to contribute to building interaction – as a means to peace-building. “We do not
undertake activities for peace as such,” Pachoulides remarked and went on to add,
We undertake activities that provide the opportunity for people from the two sides to
interact. Peace activities do not sell. The same persons come. But if you undertake
general social activities people will come and build relations. This was the mentality
from the beginning. We [AHDR] wanted to develop a culture on teaching history. We
developed methodologies for teaching history in an objective and critical way. But we
did it in view of building a society of peace. We expanded this understanding to the
activities of The Home. We, of course, undertake activities for peace, but we are not
limited to that.21
History of Home for Cooperation, http://www.home4cooperation.info/history-of-the-h4c.
Ibid.
17 Interview with Dr. Kyriakos Pachoulides, Member of the Governing Board of the Home for Cooperation, 25 April 2018,
Nicosia.
18 History of Home for Cooperation, http://www.home4cooperation.info/history-of-the-h4c. Among other things The
Home hosts conferences, music, theater, dance performances, gymnastics, language classes and adult learning
activities that bring together people from the two communities, thus increasing inter-communal contact and
advancing peace. See also, Oliver P. Richmond, Peace Formation and Political Orer in Conflict Affected Societies (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2016), 108.
19 Resident CSOs participate in the management of The Home as well.
20 Interview with Pachoulides.
21 Ibid.
15

16

8

Pre-Conditions for Peace

The Home has a number of strengths and comparative advantages. To begin with, it has
been around for more than seven years. In 2018, H4C managed for the second year to work
with almost zero funding. This has been made possible because it has developed procedures
that render it self-sufficient and sustainable. Given the history of pop-up CSOs that quickly
faded away when funding dried up, H4C’s continuity thus far sets it apart from other
initiatives. Moreover, one could argue that The Home is “too big to fail,” because it has material
substance, an actual presence that increases its prospect of survival, and because no one –
among pro-peace civil society at least – wants it to fail. Indeed, its “bridge-building” role and
function as a community centre and hub have rendered it an essential pillar of bi-communal
relations and pro-peace activism; its absence would leave a huge gap at the grassroots level.22
In this vein, Oliver Richmond argues that the establishment of H4C “represented a third stage
in the development of peace formation in Cyprus,” and adds that “it is now an unwritten rule
that everyone cooperates with the Home, from both sides and all political persuasions.23
There are, however, a number of limitations as well. One of them is the fact that H4C has
not yet been able to attract and convince more people (especially young people) to become
voluntarily involved. As things stand, there is more of a recycling process of the same people
rather than renewal and “new blood” – which seems to be a general problem in such CSOs in
Cyprus.24 This lack of interest has been “structurally affecting” The Home’s activities as well
as its sustainability prospects.25 The lack of funding is another related problem. Selfsustainability is a goal and ongoing struggle for H4C and, therefore, funding would make
things easier and help in the expansion of activities and increase of impact.
Despite the challenges and limitations, H4C claims success. From its people’s perspective,
success is often understood as something revealed in the long term. For example, The Home
collaborates with schools and it has become a place where students from both sides meet.
Within a year, a thousand children will meet; they and their families are influenced as well. In
this sense, there is an impact that will be best seen in the future. Moreover, many people go
to The Home in order to meet people from the other side. “We would like to be more and
have more,” Pachoulides said, “but the society is an important factor. If society doesn’t care, The
Home has limited results.”26 It is likely that disenchantment with the unproductive peace
process over the years might have had some negative impact on this grassroots momentum.
And yet, it is possible that H4C’s presence and operations sometimes serve to slow the
backward slide when obstacles occur at the official (Track I) level of the peace process.

http://www.home4cooperation.info/what-is-the-h4c. Also, Interview with Pachoulides.
Richmond, 107.
24 It is possible that persisting mistrust among certain parts of the society has something to do with this. See, Yiannis
Papadakis, Building inside a Cease-Fire Line: The Home for Cooperation in Divided Cyprus (EEA-Grants2011).
25 Interview with Pachoulides.
26 Ibid.
22

23

Contemporary Cases Studies of Pro-Peace Civil Society

9

Overall, the understanding of H4C’s staff and CSOs is that they exist regardless of whether
or not a settlement to the Cyprus Problem is reached, because their main aim is to foster coexistence and subvert political tension and violence before or after a settlement. There is, of
course, a broader criticism concerning H4C, but also pro-peace civil society more generally,
that “outreach to the wider public” has only been limited and that “the bi-communal
movement is becoming self-congratulatory” and rather constricted within the Buffer Zone. As
Zinovia Foka goes on to argue,
H4C has evolved into a home of bi-communalism, a space safe for its users,
characterized by (also architectural) privateness (as opposed to publicness), which
allows their ideas to grow and mature but obstructs their communalization, their
opening to the wider Cypriot publics. Initiatives are limited in the Buffer Zone, which
despite the restored mobility, still functions as a border between communities, in
spatial, political, and social terms.27
This criticism – which reflects reality at least to a certain extent – is evident in the other two
case studies as well. However, limitations in outreach and effectiveness do not always depend
on the CSO in question but also on other structural factors such as developments in the Track
I process, political power relations and narratives, ideological loyalties and so on. The next
case study concerns an organization (Cyprus Dialogue Forum) that, among other things, has
tried to address and overcome these obstacles.

Cyprus Dialogue Forum (CDF)
In March 2015, Cyprus Dialogue Forum (CDF) was established and its declaration started as
follows:
We as Political Parties, Trade Unions, Business Associations and NGOs from both communities have joined our efforts to create the Cyprus Dialogue Forum. The Cyprus
Dialogue Forum is created as a response to a need for an inclusive and permanent
space for structured dialogue and knowledge- sharing in which issues and challenges
of common concern can be addressed. Through joint reflection and consensus
building we believe this dialogue will address issues related to the Cyprus problem, by
focusing and strengthening the flow of information between the wider society and
the leaderships.28

Zinovia Foka, “Shared Space in Conflict Areas: Exploring the Case of Nicosia’s Buffer Zone “ Athens Journal of
Mediterranean Studies 1, no. 1 (2015): 53.
28 “Declaration of the Cyprus Dialogue Forum,” Cyprus Dialogue Forum (12 March 2015),
http://www.cydialogue.org/images/Declarations/DECLARATIONOFTHECYPRUSDIALOGUEFORUM.pdf.
27

10

Pre-Conditions for Peace

It is clear that CDF is different to other civil society initiatives for two main reasons: a) it
offers a platform for a structured and multi-segment, bi-communal dialogue; b) it includes
political actors in the process. From this perspective, CDF can be seen as a Track 1.5 initiative.
In summing up Tracks I and II and defining Track 1.5 diplomacy, Susan Allen Nan notes,
If track-one diplomacy is the official interaction of representatives of states, and if tracktwo diplomacy is unofficial interaction of unofficial people, in which category do
the unofficial interactions of the official representatives of states belong? Track oneand-a-half diplomacy refers to unofficial interactions between official representatives
of states.29
The CDF manages to play this role to a certain extent by bringing to the negotiating table
political party members (i.e., representatives of the official level) from the two communities.
Between 2014 and March 2015, around 44 stakeholders, including political parties, became
part of the CDF and held over 80 meetings to design the process by which the platform would
work. During those first meetings they decided on things such as their values, principles,
goals, mandate, agenda, structure, management, participation criteria, etc.30 These were all
recorded in CDF’s “Single Text” – a joint and agreed text by stakeholders, just short of a
statute.31 After 2015, more organizations were invited; today, around 104 organizations
participate in CDF.
Member organizations are divided into four main categories (or segments): NGOs,
Business and Professional Associations, Trade Unions, and Political Parties.32 Representatives
from these segments participate in CDF’s six thematic and cross-segment Task Groups; they
set the agenda and discuss generating options regarding their thematic areas. The six Task
Groups are: Labour Market, Economic Development, Culture and Memory, Political and
Security Concern, Education, and Human Rights.33
According to the Single Text, the stakeholders’ purpose and objectives are: a) providing
support to formal negotiations towards a mutually agreed federal solution through
suggestions; b) informing the public and preparing the two communities for a solution; c)
creating common understanding, multi-perspectivity, a shared vision of the future and
building a culture of co-existence; and d) creating space for citizens to raise and address issues

Suzan Allen Nan, “Track I Diplomacy,” Beyond Intractability (2003),
https://www.beyondintractability.org/essay/track1_diplomacy/.
30 Data provided by CDF’s Secretariat.
31 For more on the Single Text method see, M. Shane Smith, “Single-Text Negotiation,” Beyond Intractability (2005),
https://www.beyondintractability.org/essay/single-text-negotiation.
32 One could see the participating organizations here: https://www.cydialogue.org/index.php/2017-04-19-08-1216/member-organizations.
33 For more information on the Task Groups see, https://www.cydialogue.org/index.php/committees/task-groups.

29

Contemporary Cases Studies of Pro-Peace Civil Society

11

that might not be included in the official process.34 It is worth noting that, precisely because
of its structure, CDF cannot be seen as a traditional CSO with its own institutional hierarchy
and functions; it has, rather, a facilitating and supporting role with the end-goal of bringing
together the various parties from the two communities in structured and productive dialogue.
This role is undertaken by CDF’s Secretariat.35
In terms of CDF’s activities and successes, Erbay Akansoy, one of the Secretariat’s
coordinators, explained that the easiest way to look at CDF’s advantages is to look at it in
comparison to the formal process and look for the added value. The formal process is seen as
a non-inclusive process where there is lack of mutual understanding, and which is
characterized by conflicting narratives. “It is a competitive space, a zero-sum game,” Akansoy
noted and continued:
it is a process that has always been top-down, non-transparent… and there is a very
narrow-minded focus on the outcome – i.e., a political settlement. They have tried to
overcome this through the technical committees but they, too, are very political and
highly dependent on the formal process. If the process collapses they do as well.36
The non-formal dialogue, on the other hand, is not competitive because it is not about the
parties’ positions as such. It is more collaborative and has no timeframe, no deadline. It helps
to deconstruct the assumptions that have existed for many years, even between business
and trade unions, and even at the intra-communal level.37 And because no (political) decisions
are actually made, the dialogue allows for the development of a common understanding. As
Maria Zeniou added: “It is not about getting to a decision but about the options we could
explore as solutions to a problem. It aims to create common and genuine understanding,
thus enhancing the chances of reaching mutual accommodation.”38
The CDF Secretariat offered several examples of their success:
n

The Human Rights Task Group managed to put together contributions for the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) asked the CDF to
provide this information and it was considered a major breakthrough as civil society was
involved in providing information about the Turkish-Cypriot community.

CDF, Single Text (Nicosia: Cyprus Dialogue Forum, 2015), 5.
For the services and support that the Secretariat provides see, https://www.cydialogue.org/index.php/2017-04-19-0812-16/secretariat-support.
36 Personal Interview with Erbay Akansoy, Secretariat Coordinator, Cyprus Dialogue Forum, Nicosia, 21 March 2018.
37 Ibid.
38 Personal Interview with Maria Zeniou, Secretariat Coordinator, Cyprus Dialogue Forum, Nicosia, 21 March 2018.
34

35

Pre-Conditions for Peace

12
n

n

n

n

n

n

n

The CDF is contributing to a federal understanding. “When stakeholders design actions
jointly, they are jointly designing the future of Cyprus.” And even individually, these
organizations will design actions/projects in their own communities according to this
joint understanding – which brings them even closer together. In this sense, it is believed
that CDF counters – to some extent – the divisive narratives and actions that might be
followed at the official level in the two communities.39
The CDF has been working on developing shared values for education and ways in
which the educational systems in the two communities can be shaped in order to meet
those values and be more inclusive rather than exclusive. It also works on proposing
coordination mechanisms in the context or in spite of a solution.40
During the first visit of the International Labour Organization (ILO) to Cyprus, the
organization will help CDF stakeholders in a technical way to create relevant datasets,
identify the problems and find solutions. This support is provided both because of CDF’s
bottom-up approach as well as because thus far, according to CDF’s Secretariat, international organization reports (such as World Bank) lack the interaction with civil society
stakeholders (e.g., trade unions and business associations). They get the data that the
state provides. CDF has the opportunity and potential of filling this gap, especially when
it comes to data in the Turkish-Cypriot community.
Turkish-Cypriot institutions often ask CDF for data. The Gender Equality Commissioner of
the Republic of Cyprus has done the same.
The bi-communal organization Relatives of the Missing has been incorporated into the
Culture and Memory Task Group. They have been having regular meetings with CDF since
May 2015. They are jointly exploring ways of having a Truth and Reconciliation process,
even in the absence of formal negotiations, and looking at issues such social transformation and transitional justice.
Regardless of the collapse of negotiations at the official level during the Crans Montana
conference in the summer of 2017, dialogue within CDF has not lost momentum. By
April 2018 the stakeholders had held 21 Task Group meetings, a testament to the
commitment and resilience of the Task Groups.
After the collapse of the negotiations the CDF was also asked to support the Track l
Technical Committee on Culture, which wanted to keep meeting even though it could not
do so formally. It met twice with CDF’s support and even made an announcement saying
that it would continue to work; “this shows the impact of the CDF and that the formal
track understands the non-formal process and seeks its support,” Akansoy remarked.41 As
such, it is CDF’s view that at times it has managed to work as a “back channel” and a deescalation mechanism.

Interview with Erbay Akansoy.
Interview with Maria Zeniou.
41 Interview with Erbay Akansoy.
39
40

Contemporary Cases Studies of Pro-Peace Civil Society

13

Despite its successes, CDF faces a number of challenges and limitations as well. One of
the struggles of the stakeholders has been to define the ways in which they could contribute
to the formal process but without overstepping it. In addition, it took CDF a while to identify
its role in the periods before, during and after a possible solution as well as to make sure that
it had a continuous momentum regardless of the formal process. Until the Task Groups were
set up and work became more specific and productive there were ups and downs in
participation and momentum. Because of its operational character, CDF’s process is very long
and takes time. It took the forum a year to design the agenda and then another nine months
to set it up practically, e.g., the methods of discussion, etc.42 Moreover, dialogue fatigue is
also an issue; it tired the stakeholders and it took time to reach the point where they were
more focused and better understood their role.43
Another situation that CDF has to face is its sensitive position when dealing with
international organizations such as the UN or the ILO. The Republic of Cyprus as the only
recognized state on the island wants to make sure that it is taken into account in this process.
For its part, CDF wants to strike the right balance, addressing each side’s concerns without
creating or contributing to any antagonistic relations. The newness of such non-formal
processes and the fact that Track I “does not yet know how to deal with them” pose a host of
challenges to CDF’s efforts to create links with formal institutions.44
Lastly, another challenge comes from participation and CDF’s capacity to mobilize and
include certain (political) actors in the process. On the one hand, you have Task Groups such
as Culture and Memory, Labour Market and Education, where you have relevant participants
from the whole spectrum. The main problem arises in the participation of political parties,
and particularly the Greek-Cypriot parties. The only Greek-Cypriot parties participating at this
time in the workings of CDF are the main left-wing and main right-wing party, which are also
the biggest. Other parties participated in the beginning but withdrew in the course of time
because they had disagreements with the process, did not see much value or prospect in the
project, or because they thought it was too time-consuming. This problem has been partially
mitigated by the participation of party-affiliated organizations.
As a result, the Political and Security Concerns Task Group is the only one that starts and
stops. The reason has to do with the developments in Track I, or lack of common understanding on issues such as Security and Governance. Ideally, CDF would also like the rest of
the Greek-Cypriot parties to participate as well. The goal would not be for those parties to

Ibid.
Interview with Maria Zeniou.
44 Ibid.
42
43

Pre-Conditions for Peace

14

agree on something, but to engage in constructive dialogue and be clear as to what they
want to achieve. But there are issues that these parties consider non-starters; the challenge,
therefore, is for CDF to create an inclusive space for them as well.45
This is of course an important challenge – which CDF acknowledges – that limits the ability
of the dialogue platform to be inclusive enough with regards to different ideological currents
and to achieve results on the most sensitive issues. It also hinders its Track 1.5 capacity given
that its impact on the political domain remains restricted and, therefore, largely ineffective.
Not least because of the fact that the non-participating parties are the ones with the most
objections in terms of the peace process – its content and methodology.

Unite Cyprus Now (UCN)
The third case study, Unite Cyprus Now (UCN), concerns a very different initiative to both H4C
and CDF. It is more of a decentralized, grassroots movement than a traditional type of CSO.
And it all started with a post on Facebook by Turkish-Cypriot journalist Esra Aygin:
Tens of thousands of Turkish and Greek Cypriots are out on the streets in every city
across Cyprus to protest the failure in the negotiations to unify the island.
The two leaders, who met for the last time today to determine the fate of the stalled
negotiations, failed to take the process to the next final level.
Both leaders had come to power with the promise of solving the Cyprus problem and
unifying the island.
“They don’t have the courage to make the final decisions,” said an angry Cypriot. “They
kept us hoping for two years, and gave us nothing.”
The size of the demonstrators chanting slogans “We will not accept,” and “solution
now,” and waving olive branches is multiplying by the hour.
Panicked UN forces are unsure about how to prevent the huge crowds from entering
the buffer zone.
The sweeping demonstrations throughout the island are expected to unsettle the
leaderships on both sides and even lead to the postponement of presidential elections
in the south, political analysts say.

45

Interview with Maria Zeniou.

Contemporary Cases Studies of Pro-Peace Civil Society

15

“We are not going home” shouted a demonstrator. “We are on the street until they
announce the agreement.” ...NOT
This should have been the story I am writing right now... We deserve this treatment...
We deserve worse...46
Aygin wrote her post on 17 May 2017, just after the last of a series of meetings between
the Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot leaders aimed at restarting the negotiations that had
been interrupted two months earlier. After the final meeting there was no announcement
and each leader tried to put blame on the other side. “As a journalist I felt very frustrated –
because they negotiated for two years and made a lot of progress and all of a sudden they
found obstacles and gave no explanations. They did not even feel accountable,” Aygin said.47
Her Facebook post reported what she felt should have happened given the developments
of that day – that thousands of Cypriots would take to the streets and pressure the leaders.
Aygin’s post was very well received by other Facebook users and people started contacting
her agreeing that some sort of popular mobilization was necessary. The next step was the
creation of a Facebook Event for a meeting on Ledra/Lokmaci street – a crossing point
between the two sides in the center of Nicosia. This location was chosen because it is easily
accessible and has a lot of pedestrian traffic. The turnout was around 80 to 90 people, “known
and unknown faces.” After that, it developed into a daily occurrence as people wanted to keep
putting pressure on their leaderships for a settlement of the Cyprus Problem. Participants
made a lot of noise to demonstrate their frustration over the state of things at the official
level.48 People started brainstorming about how to bring Cypriots together using poetry,
music, dancing, etc.; according to UCN members, the whole thing developed into a
celebration of what unites Cypriots.49
Then a volunteer graphic designer stepped in and created placards – everything
happened through volunteers. Although the movement started out of negativity at the lack
of progress in the peace talks, the announcement that the two leaders would meet in New
York in early June 2017 boosted UCN’s momentum and turned it into a positive movement
of support to the official process. At its peak, UCN mobilized around 350-400 people but when
certain political parties got involved in support, “thousands of people showed up.” 50 UCN
also managed to get support from the Stelios Foundation, which agreed to cover tickets and

For Esra Aygin’s Facebook post see, https://www.facebook.com/esra.yalgin/posts/10155451183514467.
Personal Interview with Esra Aygin, initiator of Unite Cyprus Now, Nicosia, 23 April 2018.
48 Ibid.
49 Personal Interview with Kemal Baykallı, core Unite Cyprus Now member, Nicosia, 6 March 2018; Personal Interview with
Andromachi Sophocleous, core Unite Cyprus Now member, Nicosia, 6 March 2018.
50 Interviews with Kemal Baykallı and Andromachi Sophocleous.
46

47

16

Pre-Conditions for Peace

accommodation for 10 people to travel to Crans Montana, Switzerland, where a crucial peace
conference took place in July 2017.51 UCN participants were upset with the fact that ordinary
people were not involved; that it was all left to the political elites, and that leaders did not
engage civil society.52 “This is what we wanted to represent at Crans Montana,”53 Aygin noted
and continued, “we don’t care so much about the technical aspects of the solution but about
the future of our children, democracy, human rights, freedoms, respect for everyone
regardless of identity.”54 This inclusive and rather “apolitical” approach was shared by other
UCN members as well: “UCN wanted a solution – an agreement, nothing else,” Kemal Baykallı
remarked.55
Indeed, because of its spontaneous character, UCN did not have a defined constitution or
organizational structure and, therefore, no specific political or ideological framework. Its sole
purpose, at least during the initial stages, was to apply pressure on Track I in support of “a
Bizonal Bicommunal Federation (BBF) with political equality.” The main “ideology is unite
Cyprus,” Aygin added.56 The beginning of the Crans Montana peace conference and its
subsequent collapse had a multidimensional impact on UCN. As Andromachi Sophocleous
noted,57
When Crans Montana collapsed, we realized the burden that fell on our shoulders.
Until then it was politically acceptable to support the solution… After Crans Montana
we found ourselves in the middle of a blame game. We also realized that everything
was vested in two leaders trusting each other. Many members started to disappear.
There was a “huge loss of momentum and people felt that it [UCN] was not making any
difference, they felt that they didn’t matter.”58 In addition, there were many people from the
party in government, DISY, who participated in UCN prior to the collapse of the talks. Because
of the government’s involvement in the peace conference, when the talks collapsed, those
people distanced themselves from UCN. As a result, the movement was left with more liberal

Antonis Michael, “Bicommunal Movement Seeks to Raise Islanders Profile in Geneva,” Cyprus Mail (28 June 2017),
http://cyprus-mail.com/2017/06/28/bicommunal-movement-seeks-raise-islanders-profile-geneva/.
52 Interviews with Esra Aygin, Kemal Baykallı, and Andromachi Sophocleous.
53 UCN’s presence at Crans Montana was widely covered in international media as well. See e.g., Helena Smith,
“Cyprus Reunification Talks Collapse Amid Angry Scenes,” The Guardian (7 July 2017),
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jul/07/cyprus-reunification-talks-collapse-amid-angry-scenes;
“Cyprus Reunification Talks Enter Critical Phase as Leaders Submit Plans,” The Guardian (3 July 2017),
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jul/03/cyprus-reunification-talks-enter-critical-phase-as-leaderssubmit-plans.
54 Interview with Esra Aygin.
55 Interview with Kemal Baykallı.
56 Interview with Esra Aygin.
57 Interview with Andromachi Sophocleous.
58 Interview with Esra Aygin.

51

Contemporary Cases Studies of Pro-Peace Civil Society

17

and left-wing participants, though they often shared different understandings of the UCN’s
role. Moreover, it should be noted that the Turkish-Cypriot right wing never got involved in
the movement.59
Despite the challenges that the Crans Montana collapse brought about, it also ushered
UCN into a new period. A vision and mission60 started developing after participants managed
to “collect their pieces;”“we had to find something to keep people motivated but also have a
pro-peace voice – there was none other. If we disappeared there would be no one calling for
solution,” Sophocleous said.61 UCN realized that it could not advocate for a united Cyprus for
all Cypriots (i.e., the movement’s vision) unless Cypriots on both sides were connected and
jointly mobilized. Social Media remains central to UCN’s campaigning and mobilization
efforts.62 Social Media has also allowed UCN to continue to exist during the times of crisis
while reassuring participants of the movement’s transparency regarding its goals and
activities.63
Thus, after the collapse of the talks, UCN focused on the grassroots level and on exercising
pressure on the leaders towards making a difference on the ground. The vision for a
comprehensive settlement never went away but the focus shifted towards people’s daily lives
and issues such as “education, the crossing points, language teaching, cooperation, and the
lifting of psychological barriers.”64 A UCN delegation met with both leaders after Crans
Montana and made their suggestions, telling them to work on day-to-day things. In terms of
its positions regarding the official talks, UCN remains committed to BBF based on UN
parameters; it also believes that the “Guterres Framework”65 is well balanced and prepared
and that it sheds light on the thorny negotiation issues. According to Aygin, none of UCN
activists has any objection to this framework.66 The mere fact that UCN members managed
to meet the two leaders is important and demonstrates the role they acquired. This

Ibid.
For the Vision and Mission of UCN see,
https://www.facebook.com/unitecyprusnow/photos/a.1539168596094352.1073741829.1537808686230343/16656
63750111502/?type=3&theater.
61 Interview with Andromachi Sophocleous.
62 Facebook page: https://www.facebook.com/unitecyprusnow/?hc_ref=ARSLQne6_NSxUHVtQv7vmzt_qsVS6y0lbWAc1sGXep-rAfqdCvnsF1sve7_KxwkzEM&fref=nf;
Facebook group: https://www.facebook.com/groups/1363645650384999/;
Twitter account: https://twitter.com/UniteCyprusNow.
63 Interview with Kemal Baykallı.
64 Interview with Esra Aygin.
65 Refers to UN Secretary General, Antonio Guterres’s, efforts at the Crans Montana conference to propose “a framework
for simultaneously resolving six major outstanding issues at both tables as elements of a final package that… would
lead to a comprehensive settlement.” See, UN, “Report of the Secretary-General on His Mission of Good Offices in
Cyprus,” United Nations Security Council S/2017/814 (28 September 2017): 5.
66 Interview with Esra Aygin.

59
60

Pre-Conditions for Peace

18

achievement could be attributed to the international media coverage that UCN members
received during their presence in Crans Montana, to their persisting demonstrations in Nicosia
and, possibly, to influential persons that participate in the movement.
After Crans Montana, UCN members also started to think more about their organizational
structure and decision-making process, which they sought to determine through a series of
meetings even as they tried to avoid a hierarchical model. Despite these efforts, concrete and
stable outcomes have not yet been achieved, and participants are still looking for the
appropriate model. When asked about their limitations, UCN members agree on the issue of
structure and cohesiveness. The lack of an organizational framework, which was in part a
symptom of its spontaneity, has always been a significant limitation – one that restricted their
influence. The lack of common ideology and the weak structure are also linked to this.67 Other
limitations include: the language barrier, since most of UCN’s public activity is carried out in
English; the issue of finances, since the more the resources the bigger the impact; and,
according to UCN, the fact that Cypriots do not feel empowered – they think that their voice
does not matter or have an impact. This is something that the movement is also trying to
address. Lastly, UCN members identify the fact that each side tends to disparage the other as
a great – and otherwise old – problem that affects them as well: “both sides blame us and
ridicule us because we are trying to put pressure on both sides. Some said that Turkey initiated
this movement. Even leaders who participate in this process denigrated UCN – not openly, we
know where most of the rumors are coming from.”68
UCN also faces the challenge that is posed by the dependency that the grassroots and
civil society actors have on the official process. Despite its success in certain areas, UCN’s
declining momentum as a result of the collapse of the peace talks brought about great
disappointment within the movement. Baykallı’s words illustrate vividly this reality:69
We made the right analysis but our biggest achievement was survival. Federation,
forgiveness, etc., were outside of our powers. But UCN published announcements on
sensitive issues trying to bridge the extreme positions, and change the narrative. We
challenged the official narratives without using a segmented language. We provided
information to both sides – objectively. But we discovered that civil society is an
illusion, a lie. Each segment is focused on its own agenda. It’s very difficult to come
together for a common goal. Cypriots curse their politicians, but side with them instead
of mobilizing in support of the talks. We shouldn’t be affected by elections; we should
be able to affect them. People are disinterested. Even core persons of UCN use official
rhetoric, segmented rhetoric.

Interviews with Kemal Baykallı and Andromachi Sophocleous.
Interview with Esra Aygin.
69 Interview with Kemal Baykallı.
67
68

Contemporary Cases Studies of Pro-Peace Civil Society

19

Once again it becomes obvious that political affiliations often hinder inter-communal
cooperation and bi-communal mobilization. And yet, UCN has not given up. According to its
members, it continues to have the means to participate in the public discourse and mobilize
masses. And it intends to continue, in any way it can to help – by contributing to the debate,
to the official negotiations, to everyday interaction between Greek-Cypriots and TurkishCypriots, and to shaping a pro-peace political culture.70

70

Interviews with Kemal Baykallı, Esra Aygin, and Andromachi Sophocleous.

20

MEASURING CIVIL SOCIETY SUCCESS

E

vidence related to inter-communal relations and the bi-communal movement since
2003 has been gathered from time to time, and opinions have varied regarding the
impact of the checkpoint opening on Tracks I and II. In a survey analysis first published
in 2008,71 three main politico-ideological clusters were identified in each community: 1) ProReconciliation Critic of Ethno-nationalism; 2) Communitarianism; and 3) Ethno-nationalism.
Among other results, the analysis finds that only “the majority of the pro-reconciliation
groups in both communities (70.3% of GCs and 75.2% of TCs)72 saw the opening of the
checkpoints as an opportunity for the development of better bi-communal relations in a
spirit of furthering trust,”73 that is, those Cypriots who maintain high levels of contact with
members of the other community.74 The survey also revealed that higher levels of contact
predict trends such as more trust and forgiveness towards, as well as lower threat perceptions
of, the other community. And yet only 33.4% of Greek-Cypriots and 20% of Turkish-Cypriots
fell within the pro-reconciliation cluster.75
According to a later (2011) CIVICUS report on Cyprus (Civil Society Index Report), 50% of
Greek-Cypriot responders stated that they do not visit the other community at all; 26%
responded that they have visited the Turkish-Cypriot community one to four times since 2004
and 13% once a year. Importantly enough, the most common reasons for visiting are: to see
their birthplace, pilgrimage, and visits to friends and relatives.76 On the other hand, more

Charis Psaltis, “Χαρτογραφώντας Το Πεδίο Των Διακοινοτικών Σχέσεων: Μια Κοινωνιο-Ψυχολογική Ανάλυση [Mapping
the Field of Inter-Communal Relations: A Socio-Psychological Analysis],” Diethnis kai Evropaiki Politiki: Triminiaia Politiki
kai Oikonomiki Eptheorisi 11 (2008).
72 GCs: Greek-Cypriots; TCs: Turkish-Cypriots.
73 Charis Psaltis, “Intergroup Trust and Contact in Transition: A Social Representations Perspective on the Cyprus Conflict,”
in Trust and Conflict: Representation, Culture and Dialogue, ed. Ivana Markova and Alex Gillespie (London and New
York: Routledge, 2012), 97.
74 Psaltis, “Χαρτογραφώντας Το Πεδίο Των Διακοινοτικών Σχέσεων.”
75 37.7% of Greek-Cypriots were associated with Communitarianism and 28.9% with Ethno-nationalism; 43% of TurkishCypriots were associated with Communitarianism and 37 with Ethno-nationalism. Psaltis, “Intergroup Trust and
Contact in Transition: A Social Representations Perspective on the Cyprus Conflict,” 91-95.
76 Michalis Avraam and Bulent Kanol, eds., An Assessment of Civil Society in Cyprus - Civicus: Civil Society Index Report for
Cyprus (Cyprus: UNDP-USAID, 2011), 113-14.
71

Measuring Civil Society Success

21

than 40% of Turkish-Cypriots have never visited the Greek-Cypriot community while only
about 18% stated that they visit regularly (at least a couple of times a month); leisure and
shopping were recorded as the most common reasons for visiting.77
CIVICUS notes another important reality: that even though CSO participation in bicommunal activities since 2004 increased from 40% to 70%, “the enthusiasm of civil society
in this regard does not seem to be matched by the general public;” not only that, but the
public seems to be much more skeptical with regards to the impact bi-communal activities
have on the peace process.78 The statistics are from 2011 but the reality has not changed
much. All three case studies analyzed above point to the same, persisting challenge: the
difficulty of mobilizing the greater public to the end of providing input to, pressuring or
supporting Track I. Increased contact between Greek-Cypriots and Turkish-Cypriots evidently
works but its results are limited precisely because of this challenge – communication and
contact exists primarily between those Cypriots who are already positively inclined towards
reconciliation and the solution of the Cyprus Problem. To be sure, movement between the two
sides has also increased, but that does not in itself predict more meaningful contact between
Greek-Cypriots and Turkish-Cypriots or more common attitudes towards the kind of the
settlement,79 especially if the main reasons for visiting are shopping and leisure. It should be
added that, though smaller, the Turkish-Cypriot civil society is proportionally bigger and more
active than the Greek-Cypriot; the former evolved to a great extent in response to the social,
economic and political needs that exist within the community because of the particular status
quo.80 Moreover, (bi-communal) peace and reconciliation CSOs constitute only a small part
of civil society in the two communities. The small number of this kind of CSOs is another factor
that limits their impact.
A series of surveys conducted between 2013 and 2016 by SCORE Index showed that the
propensity towards reconciliation has not changed significantly (see Table I). Likewise, the
variables of Cultural Distance and Quality of Contact, which are also indicative of the relations
between the two communities, have also remained at rather low levels especially in the
Greek-Cypriot community. What is even more interesting is that during 2015 and 2016, a
mostly positive period for the Track I peace process, the quality of contact decreased
significantly, a fact that goes very much against the basic premise of the Contact Theory. One
could argue that for the Greek-Cypriots this was partly due to the interruption of negotiations
in late 2014 until well into 2015, due to Turkish violations of the Republic of Cyprus’s sovereign

Ibid., 114.
Ibid.
79 George Psyllides, “TCs view GCs far more positively than 10 years ago, surveys show,” Cyprus Mail (6 January 2018),
https://cyprus-mail.com/2018/01/06/tcs-view-gcs-far-positively-10-years-ago-surveys-show/.
80 Ibid.
77
78

Pre-Conditions for Peace

22

rights in its Exclusive Economic Zone.81 It is also possible that, for Turkish-Cypriots, the
repercussions of a solution to the Cyprus Problem posed a challenge, especially when it came
to the Territory and Property chapters of the negotiations. For example, the lowest values of
intergroup contact among Turkish-Cypriots were found in areas such as Karpasia and
Morfou.82 In the context of the negotiations and with the prospect of a settlement, the latter
would have been returned to Greek-Cypriots, while it is possible that many Turkish settlers
who currently live in Karpasia feared that they would lose their properties to their GreekCypriot owners.
Table I: Variables of Inter-Communal Relations in Cyprus
Greek-Cypriots towards Turkish-Cypriots
Variable

2013

2014

2015

2016

Reconciliation

6

6.2

6.8

N/A

Cultural Distance

6.1

7.0

5.8

N/A

Quality of Contact

6

5.6

2

2.6

Turkish-Cypriots towards Greek-Cypriots
Variable

2013

2014

2015

2016

Reconciliation

6.9

6.2

5.0

N/A

Cultural Distance

5.4

6.4

6.3

N/A

Quality of Contact

7

9

2.5

3.4

Created with data from SCORE Index, http://scoreforpeace.org/ 83
The poor multiplying effect of intergroup contact can be also seen in the case of women
and youth in the two communities. For example, a survey conducted in the Greek-Cypriot
community revealed that young people distance themselves emotionally from the Cyprus
Problem while most of the respondents never had any contact or visited the Turkish-Cypriot
community citing religious, cultural and language reasons.84 Similarly, even though women

Elias Hazou, “Eide: No Prospects for Resumption of Talks,” Cyprus Mail (14 January 2015), http://cyprusmail.com/2015/01/14/eide-should-brief-unsc-objectively-says-the-government/.
82 http://scoreforpeace.org/?country=1&year=29&dimension=Other%20indicators&indicator=Intergroup%20
contact&of=TCs&towards=GCs
83 The values are based on a 1-10 scale. The bigger the value the bigger the propensity towards Reconciliation, the bigger
the Cultural Distance, the better the Quality of Contact.
84 Ioanna Christodoulou et al., “Investigating the Roots of Political Disengagement of Young Greek Cypriots,” Contemporary
Social Science 12, no. 3-4 (2017).
81

Measuring Civil Society Success

23

are in principle more pro-reconciliation and “key to ending violent conflict and to the establishment of lasting peace,”85 a recent survey found that in the case of Cyprus less than 10% of
women are in contact with people from the other community.86 From the perspective of the
above-mentioned data, one could go so far as to argue that, in Cyprus, higher levels of
interaction between the two communities and higher prospects of settlement may create a
negative effect in perceptions about the other community, probably out of fear at the changes
that the alteration of the status quo would bring about. Furthermore, it is worth noting that,
apart from the challenge of mobilizing people for peace, the problem of the limited ability
of CSOs to influence decision-making at the policy level has not changed over the past
decade or so.87 As this report has shown, Track I remains largely dissociated from Track II and
even Track 1.5.

Anna Koukkides-Procopiou, “Gender and Inclusive Security: A New Approach to the Cyprus Problem within the
Framework on Security Dialogue,” Berghof Foundation & SeeD Security Dialogue Project - Background Paper
(2017): 8. And, UNSC, “Landmark Resolution on Women, Peace and Security,” S/RES/1325 (2000),
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/wps/#resolution; Olga Demetriou, Umut Bozkurt, and Yiouli Taki, “Women’s
Peace in Cyprus: Recommendations of the Gender Advisory Team (GAT) on Implementing UNSCR 1325 Provisions on
Women, Peace and Security,” PRIO Cyprus Center Report 3 (2012).
86 Marilena Evangelou, “Ελάχιστο Ποσοστό Γυναικών Έχει Επαφή Με Την Άλλη Κοινότητα [Only a Small Percentage of
Women Have Contacts with the Other Community] “ Politis (19 April 2018), http://politis.com.cy/article/elachistopososto-ginekon-echi-epafi-me-tin-alli-kinotita-webtv.
87 UNDP, Participatory Civil Society Assessments - Experiences from the Field: Cyprus, the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Mozambique, Uruguay, Viet Nam (New York: United Nations Development Programme, 2011), 14.

85

24

CONCLUSIONS:
PRE-CONDITIONS FOR AN INCLUSIVE
PEACE PROCESS AND SUSTAINABLE PEACE

A

ccording to Thania Paffenholz, there are seven functions for civil society in peacebuilding: 1) protecting citizens against violence from all parties; 2) monitoring
human rights violations, including the implementation of peace agreements, etc.;
3) advocating for peace and human rights; 4) socializing people to values of peace and
democracy as well as developing the in-group identity of marginalized groups; 5) working
for inter-group social cohesion by bringing people together from adversarial groups; 6)
facilitating dialogue on the local and national levels between all sorts of actors; and 7)
service delivering to create entry points for peace-building.88
As seen in this report, civil society in Cyprus has managed to achieve only some of the
above functions, and to a limited extent. There have been of course improvements, but there
are also fundamental problems that have persisted. Identifying and addressing these
problems is imperative so that the pre-conditions for an inclusive, multileveled peace process
are formed, as these will ensure that sustainable peace is possible. They could be summarized
as follows, in no particular order:
1. Ideological confines within pro-peace CSOs
As demonstrated repeatedly, because most pro-peace CSOs play a primarily supportive
role for Track I without particularly challenging the framework, content or methodology
of the negotiations, it becomes very difficult for them to appeal to people who see things
differently. This by extension precludes the opportunity of addressing and alleviating, if
possible, their fears and concerns or the possibility to actually take into account their
input. As Aygin of UCN put it,

88

Thania Paffenholz, “Civil Society and Peacebuilding,” The Centre on Conflict, Development and Peacebuilding CCDP
Working Paper no. 4 (2010): 5.

Conclusions: Pre-Conditions for an Inclusive Peace Process and Sustainable Peace

25

we don’t have time to deal with the hardliners. But we want to approach people who don’t
care. There are people who are scared, for example, because of language. There are people
on both sides who feel disempowered. There is also this belief that people don’t have an
impact – but people can make a lot of difference. We are not excluding anyone but as a
grassroots movement, we are limited by a lot of things... Right-wing people won’t make
the difference. Most people are undecided – this is the group we are targeting.89
For H4C it has been easier to play a more “neutral” role due to its bridging character. But
its success has been limited outside the pool of people who are already pro-peace, albeit
H4C staff expects that they will have an impact in the long run. For its part, CDF has no
ideology of its own, and despite its success in getting dozens of civil society and political
organizations to dialogue, the absence of Greek-Cypriot centrist and right-wing political
parties greatly limits the success and impact that the platform can have – at least in terms
of informing Track I. It is essential that pro-peace CSOs listen to and address the concerns
behind the – what is often called “hardline” – positions of those who have different
opinions.
2. Grassroots participation hindered by political affiliations and party loyalties
However, ideological barriers do not exist solely among pro-peace CSOs. External politicoideological attachments and/or political party loyalties often hinder sustained
participation, mobilization and socialization among people with different perspectives
and beliefs. This was revealed to be true of both CDF and UCN. Not least, the problem has
to do with how many people adhere to official master narratives (i.e., often monoperspectival and selective views of history and the conflict in question), which “construct
a threatened self and generate distrust” 90 towards the other community, especially during
times of crisis. Socialization is thus rendered, once again, ineffective. At the grassroots
level, the problem can only be addressed by deconstructing official narratives using
facts instead of perceptions. At the same time, there is a need for the pro-peace movement
on both sides to mobilize outside Nicosia, in an inclusive manner, to reach out and inform
people in other cities who are usually indifferent and who find it easier to adhere to official
polarizing narratives.

89
90

Interview with Esra Aygin.
Charis Psaltis et al., “Social Representations of the Past in Post-Conflict Societies: Adherence to Official Historical
Narratives and Distrust through Heightened Threats,” in History Education and Conflict Transformation: Social
Psychological Theories, History Teaching and Reconciliation, ed. Charis Psaltis, Mario Carretero, and Sabina CehajicClancy (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017), 98.

26

Pre-Conditions for Peace

3. Lack of communication-connection between Track I and Track 1.5 or II
Perhaps one of the most important obstacles to CSO efforts to be effective is the fact that
either there are no communication channels between Track I and Track II or Track I does
not listen and does not take into account what civil society has to say. It is also the case
that the very methodology of the peace process is by definition little to non-transparent
– a reality that leaves civil society feeling weak, powerless and irrelevant. Any political
leadership that truly cares about peace, and sustainable peace at that, should address the
deeper problems that produce and reproduce the problem within the society.91 And this
can only be effectively achieved through open communication links with civil society.
Such an approach, in turn, presupposes that the leadership has the necessary vision and
political will.
Overall, it is evident that there has been very little success at both the official and
grassroots levels. As Charis Psaltis and Huseyin Cakal write,
the geographical division and the low levels of contact between members of the two
communities suggest that Cypriot identity is still not an identity that symbolically
encompasses both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots for most of the participants in our
research. In fact, one of the main challenges for the viability of a reunited federal Cyprus
is the promotion of an inclusive form of civic identity or constitutional patriotism as
Cypriots irrespective of the ethnic origin of the inhabitants of Cyprus.92
Indeed, the emergence of a new Cypriot identity, ethnically speaking, may not be possible. It
might not even be necessary. What would certainly be a requirement is for both communities
to be able to live together under one state. In order for that to happen, and until that happens,
inter-communal relations and contact as well as bi-communalism cannot be marginalized; it
cannot be the exception and it cannot be only about a few Cypriots. Common everyday needs
are calling for solutions. Common needs and common solutions give rise to common interests
and benefits. Common interests and benefits have the capability of removing historical and
ideological barriers to communication, cooperation, development, security and peace. Even
the strongest positions, the respective communal “red lines,” can change if the concerns lying
behind them are identified, understood and addressed.93

Zenonas Tziarras, “Ethnicity and Ethnic Conflict: Comparing Cyprus and Sri Lanka,” in Contemporary Social and Political
Aspects of the Cyprus Problem, ed. Jonathan Warner, David W. Lovell, and Michalis Kontos (Newcastle Upon Tyne:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2016), 223-25.
92 Charis Psaltis and Huseyin Cakal, “Social Identity in a Divided Cyprus,” in Understanding Peace and Conflict through
Social Identity Theory: Contemporary Global Perspectives, ed. Shelley McKeown, Reeshma Haji, and Neil Ferguson
(Switzerland: Springer, 2016), 241.
93 Emine Eminel Sülün and Zenonas Tziarras, “Federal Cyprus in the Context of Regional Security,” Berghof Foundation &
SeeD Security Dialogue Project - Background Paper (2017).
91

Conclusions: Pre-Conditions for an Inclusive Peace Process and Sustainable Peace

27

Civil society feels that Track I should listen, and that CSOs can and should make it listen. On
the other hand, officials in Track I often think that they know better. The truth is that a paradigm
change in the peace process, and inter-communal relations more generally, necessitates a topdown initiative as well. It is important that inter-communal contact, grassroots mobilization,
the cultivation of cooperation in sectors of common interest, and Track I-Track II communication
are somehow institutionalized. This could gradually reduce the various obstacles and address
the identified problems – not by promoting or imposing any specific political goals with
respect to the settlement of the conflict, but by fostering a genuine dialogue between the
various levels of society as well as generating solutions to everyday problems with the prospect
of a common future and sustainable peace for all Cypriots.

28

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allport, Gordon. The Nature of Prejudice. 3rd ed. New York: Perseus Books, 1979.
Avraam, Michalis, and Bulent Kanol, eds. An Assessment of Civil Society in Cyprus - Civicus:
Civil Society Index Report for Cyprus. Cyprus: UNDP-USAID, 2011.
Azar, Edward. “Protracted Social Conflicts and Second Track Diplomacy.” In Second
Track/Citizens’ Diplomacy: Concepts and Techniques for Conflict Transformation,
edited by John Davies and Edward (Edy) Kaufman, 15-30. Lanham, Boulder,
New York and Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2003.
CDF. Single Text. Nicosia: Cyprus Dialogue Forum, 2015.
Christodoulou, Ioanna, Charis Pashias, Sotiris Theocharides, and Bettina Davou.
“Investigating the Roots of Political Disengagement of Young Greek Cypriots.”
Contemporary Social Science 12, no. 3-4 (2017): 376-92.
Davies, John, and Edy Kaufman. “Second Track/Citizens’ Diplomacy: An Overview.”
In Second Track/Citizens’ Diplomacy: Concepts and Techniques for Conflict
Transformation, edited by John L. Davies and Edward (Edy) Kafuman, 1-14.
Lanham, Boulder, New York and Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2003.
Davies, John L., and Edward (Edy) Kaufman, eds. Second Track/Citizens’ Diplomacy:
Concepts and Techniques for Conlict Tranformation. Lanham, Boulder, New York
and Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2003.
“Declaration of the Cyprus Dialogue Forum.” Cyprus Dialogue Forum (12 March 2015).
http://www.cydialogue.org/images/Declarations/DECLARATIONOFTHECYPRUSDIA
LOGUEFORUM.pdf.
Demetriou, Olga, Umut Bozkurt, and Yiouli Taki. “Women’s Peace in Cyprus:
Recommendations of the Gender Advisory Team (GAT) on Implementing UNSCR
1325 Provisions on Women, Peace and Security.” PRIO Cyprus Center Report 3 (2012).
Evangelou, Marilena. “Ελάχιστο Ποσοστό Γυναικών Έχει Επαφή Με Την Άλλη Κοινότητα
[Only a Small Percentage of Women Have Contacts with the Other Community] “
Politis (19 April 2018). http://politis.com.cy/article/elachisto-pososto-ginekon-echiepafi-me-tin-alli-kinotita-webtv.

Bibliography

29

Foka, Zinovia. “Shared Space in Conflict Areas: Exploring the Case of Nicosia’s Buffer Zone “.
Athens Journal of Mediterranean Studies 1, no. 1 (2015): 45-59.
Gillespie, Norman, Vasiliki Georgiou, and Sevinc Insay. “Civil Society and Trust Building in
Cyprus.” Development in Practice 23, no. 8 (2013): 1078-83.
Hazou, Elias. “Eide: No Prospects for Resumption of Talks.” Cyprus Mail (14 January 2015).
http://cyprus-mail.com/2015/01/14/eide-should-brief-unsc-objectively-says-thegovernment/.
Jarraud, Nicolas, Christopher Louise, and Giorgos Filippou. “The Cypriot Civil Society
Movement: A Legitimate Player in the Peace Process?”. Jounral of Peacebuilding
& Development 8, no. 1 (2013): 45-59.
Jarraud, Nicolas Stephane, and Alexandros Lordos. “Participatory Approaches to
Environmental Conflict Resolution in Cyprus.” Conflict Resolution Quarterly 29,
no. 3 (2012): 262-81.
Kanol, Bülent, and İlke Dağli. “Civil Society Active Dialogue Networks in Cyprus: Peace-Ing
It Together at the Grassroots “. In Contemporary Social and Political Aspects of the
Cyprus Problem, edited by Jonathan Warner, David W. Lovell and Michalis Kontos,
263-97. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2016.
Kool, Tamara. “The Role of Civil Society in Peacekeeping Missions.” UNU-Merit (2016).
https://www.merit.unu.edu/the-role-of-civil-society-in-peacekeeping-missions/.
Koukkides-Procopiou, Anna. “Gender and Inclusive Security: A New Approach to the Cyprus
Problem within the Framework on Security Dialogue.” Berghof Foundation & SeeD
Security Dialogue Project - Background Paper (2017).
Lavergne, Réal, ed. Advisory Group on Civil Society and Aid Effectiveness: Synthesis of Findings
and Recommendations. 2nd ed. Canada: OECD-DAC, 2008.
Michael, Antonis. “Bicommunal Movement Seeks to Raise Islanders Profile in Geneva.”
Cyprus Mail (28 June 2017). http://cyprus-mail.com/2017/06/28/bicommunalmovement-seeks-raise-islanders-profile-geneva/.
Nan, Suzan Allen. “Track I Diplomacy.” Beyond Intractability (2003).
https://www.beyondintractability.org/essay/track1_diplomacy/.
Paffenholz, Thania. “Civil Society and Peacebuilding.” The Centre on Conflict, Development
and Peacebuilding CCDP Working Paper no. 4 (2010).
Papadakis, Yiannis. Building inside a Cease-Fire Line: The Home for Cooperation in Divided
Cyprus. EEA-Grants2011.
Pettigrew, Thomas F. “Intergroup Contact Theory.” Annual Review of Psychology 49 (1998): 65-85.

30

Pre-Conditions for Peace

Psaltis, Charis. “Intergroup Trust and Contact in Transition: A Social Representations
Perspective on the Cyprus Conflict.” In Trust and Conflict: Representation, Culture
and Dialogue, edited by Ivana Markova and Alex Gillespie. London and New York:
Routledge, 2012.
———. “Χαρτογραφώντας Το Πεδίο Των Διακοινοτικών Σχέσεων: Μια ΚοινωνιοΨυχολογική Ανάλυση [Mapping the Field of Inter-Communal Relations:
A Socio-Psychological Analysis].” Diethnis kai Evropaiki Politiki: Triminiaia Politiki
kai Oikonomiki Eptheorisi 11 (2008): 133-43.
Psaltis, Charis, and Huseyin Cakal. “Social Identity in a Divided Cyprus.” In Understanding
Peace and Conflict through Social Identity Theory: Contemporary Global Perspectives,
edited by Shelley McKeown, Reeshma Haji and Neil Ferguson, 229-44. Switzerland:
Springer, 2016.
Psaltis, Charis, Renata Franc, Anouk Smeekes, Maria Ioannou, and Iris Žeželj. “Social
Representations of the Past in Post-Conflict Societies: Adherence to Official
Historical Narratives and Distrust through Heightened Threats.” In History Education
and Conflict Transformation: Social Psychological Theories, History Teaching and
Reconciliation, edited by Charis Psaltis, Mario Carretero and Sabina Cehajic-Clancy,
97-122. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017.
Psyllides, George. “TCs view GCs far more positively than 10 years ago, surveys show.”
Cyprus Mail (6 January 2018).
Richmond, Oliver P. Peace Formation and Political Orer in Conflict Affected Societies.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2016.
Smith, Helena. “Cyprus Reunification Talks Collapse Amid Angry Scenes.” The Guardian
(7 July 2017). https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jul/07/cyprusreunification-talks-collapse-amid-angry-scenes.
———. “Cyprus Reunification Talks Enter Critical Phase as Leaders Submit Plans.” The
Guardian (3 July 2017). https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jul/03/cyprusreunification-talks-enter-critical-phase-as-leaders-submit-plans.
Smith, M. Shane. “Single-Text Negotiation.” Beyond Intractability (2005).
https://www.beyondintractability.org/essay/single-text-negotiation.
Sülün, Emine Eminel, and Zenonas Tziarras. “Federal Cyprus in the Context of Regional
Security.” Berghof Foundation & SeeD Security Dialogue Project - Background
Paper (2017).

Bibliography

31

Tziarras, Zenonas. “Ethnicity and Ethnic Conflict: Comparing Cyprus and Sri Lanka.” In
Contemporary Social and Political Aspects of the Cyprus Problem, edited by Jonathan
Warner, David W. Lovell and Michalis Kontos, 193-230. Newcastle Upon Tyne:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2016.
UN. “Report of the Secretary-General on His Mission of Good Offices in Cyprus.” United
Nations Security Counil S/2017/814 (28 September 2017).
UNDP. Participatory Civil Society Assessments - Experiences from the Field: Cyprus, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Mozambique, Uruguay, Viet Nam. New York:
United Nations Development Programme, 2011.
UNSC. “Landmark Resolution on Women, Peace and Security.” S/RES/1325 (2000).
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/wps/#resolution.

The report can be ordered from:
PRIO Cyprus Centre
P.O.Box 25157, 1307 Nicosia, Cyprus
Tel: +357 22 456555/4
cypruscentre@prio.org

Against the background of Cypriot civil society’s growing role since the early 2000s,
this report aims to track the progress or lack thereof and identify the limitations
and prospects of pro-peace grassroots mobilization in Cyprus. As such, it focuses
on three contemporary case studies of pro-peace civil society in Cyprus: The Home
for Cooperation, Cyprus Dialogue Forum and United Cyprus Now. Each case study
provides a different perspective of pro-peace civil society mobilization. The Home
for Cooperation is looked at as one of the older and main initiatives given that it
functions as a meeting space that hosts other pro-peace civil society organizations
and initiatives as well. The Cyprus Dialogue Forum is examined as probably the
biggest, most ambitious and most structured platform of multi-segment intercommunal dialogue thus far. The Unite Cyprus Now initiative is quite different to the
previous two in that it emerged rather spontaneously at the grassroots level, with
extensive use of social media, and it still remains largely decentralized.
The report goes on to assesses the success, limitations and potential of those propeace initiatives and lists a number of pre-conditions that need to be pursued at
the grassroots and official levels for a more impactful approach to peacebuilding
and reconciliation. It is ultimately argued that, in addition to efforts that should be
made by civil society towards a more inclusive and effective grassroots movement,
Track I has great responsibility in providing the space to civil society thus allowing
it to be empowered and be part of the solution both in terms of improving everyday
inter-communal relations as well as supporting the official peace process.

ISBN 978-82-7288-878-6 (online)

The report can be ordered from:
PRIO Cyprus Centre
P.O.Box 25157, 1307 Nicosia, Cyprus
Tel: +357 22 456555/4
cypruscentre@prio.org

