Reconciliation and Peace Economics
in Cyprus
Summary of Findings (February 2012)

EuropeAid Cypriot Civil Society in Action II
Programme
Stream C: Support to NGOs and international organisations
promoting reconciliation projects including research leading to
a better understanding of issues affecting trust between the two
communities

Project Leader: Dr. M. K. Flynn
Reconciliation Head: Dr. Tony King
Peace Economics Head: Prof. Derek Braddon
EU Legal Affairs Advisor: Christian Dadomo
Project Signatory: University of the West of England
(UWE), Bristol, UK
Project Dates: April 2010 Π February 2012

ii

DISCLAIMER: The text compiled in this publication, including the
terminology used, is the sole responsibility of the University of the West
of England (UWE), Bristol, UK as one of the beneficiaries of the EUfunded project ΥReconciliation and Peace Economics in CyprusΦ
(EuropeAid Cypriot Civil Society in Action II Programme). In no way
can the contents of this publication be attributed to the European
Commission. The EU does not recognise the ΥTurkish Republic of
Northern CyprusΦ but only the Republic of Cyprus, its Member State.
Article 1 (3) of Council Regulation 389/2006 applies which reads: ΥThe
granting of such assistance shall not imply recognition of any public
authority in the areas other than the Government of the Republic of
CyprusΦ.

The entire content of this report is copyright of the University of the West of
England, Bristol, UK - © The University of the West of England 2012. All
rights reserved. Any redistribution or reproduction of part or all of the contents
in any form is prohibited other than for personal and educational use only.

iii

Contents

I. Notes ................................................................................................................................... 1-3
II. Executive Summary ........................................................................................................ 4-5
III. Project Introduction (M.K. Flynn) ............................................................................. 6-10
IV. The EU Context (C. Dadomo) .................................................................................. 11-14
V. Reconciliation (T. King) .............................................................................................. 15-66
Figures .............................................................................................................................................................. 29-66

VI. Peace Economics (D. Braddon and T. King) .......................................................... 67-97
Figures .............................................................................................................................................................. 81-96

VII. Project Delivery (M.K. Flynn) ............................................................................... 97-101
VIII. Concluding Comments .............................................................................................. 102
IX. Project Team ................................................................................................................... 103

1

I. Notes
Abbreviations:






GC Π Greek Cypriot
GCC Π Greek Cypriot community; GCC surveys included a very small
number of non-Cypriots able to respond to surveys in Greek.
TC Π Turkish Cypriot
TCC Π Turkish Cypriot community; TCC surveys included a minority of nonCypriots able to respond to surveys in Turkish.
TO Π Turkish-origin residents in northern Cyprus often otherwise referred to
as ΥsettlersΦ or immigrants.Φ

Although ethnic and national differentiation is important in Cyprus for a variety of
reasons, the study did not exclude people who did not identify specifically as
Cypriot, on the grounds that anyone who is ordinarily resident in Cyprus has a stake
in the future of the island.

Terminology:
The question of how to refer to the constituent entities of the island of Cyprus is a
thorny one. The project team, through any terminological use or inference, does not
take a stand on the future political dispensation for the island.
The Turkish Cypriot-administered north of the island is recognised as the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) only by Turkey, and its ports and airports are
closed to international traffic. The only institutions in the north that are formally
recognised are the Nicosia Turkish Municipality and the Turkish Cypriot Chamber
of Commerce. The GC-dominated Republic of Cyprus is not recognised by Turkey,
but is recognised internationally as the legitimate government of the island, and
therefore enjoys all the consequent privileges under international law. Terminology
revolves around the question of formally recognising institutions, something that the
GCC and Republic of Cyprus resist vis à vis the north.

2

In this project we refer to the south of the island as the ΥRepublic of CyprusΦ (RoC) or
Υthe southΦ, and the north as Υnorthern CyprusΦ or Υthe northΦ. We use both the Greek
and Turkish names for Green Line crossing points, as well as some cities, mentioned.

Acknowledgements:
The project is indebted to Christos Marangos (CYMAR, RoC) and Mine Yucel
(Prologue Consulting, northern Cyprus) for carrying out surveys and focus groups.
The survey questions and discussion guide for the focus groups were developed in
collaboration between UWE project staff, CYMAR and Prologue. The project
application could not have been successfully tendered without the help of Vanessa
Luk at UWEΦs Office for Research, Business and Innovation. Later in the project, Dr.
Kieran McCartan (Applied Social Sciences Π Criminology / Faculty of Health and
Life Sciences, UWE) provided invaluable assistance with the survey data.

The project also benefitted at various times from advice, discussion and/or
assistance provided especially by: Tulin Aker (Association for Historical Dialogue
and Research / Home for Cooperation); Dr. Umut Bozkurt (Eastern Mediterranean
University); Prof. Diana Chigas (Tufts University and the Reflecting on Peace
Practice Project of CDA-Collaborative Learning Projects, USA); Yeshim Harris (All
Party Parliamentary Group on Conflict Issues and Engi, UK); Dr. James Ker-Lindsay
(London School of Economics, UK); Alexandros Lordos (Cyprus 2015); Mary
Southcott (Friends of Cyprus, UK); Dr. Craig Webster (University of Nicosia);
Nicholas Whyte (Independent Diplomat, Brussels office); Zoe Wilkinson (INTRAC,
UK); Panayiota Xenophontos (Expert Panel); and Dr. Christalla Yakinthou
(International Centre for Transitional Justice, USA).

Personnel working in Cyprus for UNDP-ACT, the US Embassy, British High
Commission and the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO) are thanked, as are all
Cypriot interviewees. This is in addition to acknowledging the help of the Nicosiabased Management Centre and NGO Support Centre for disseminating information

3

about project events. Staff at the EU office in northern Nicosia provided crucial
advice as to negotiating EU bureaucracy.

However, all views and interpretations of data appearing in this report are those of
the project team alone and do not reflect or infer opinions of others.

4

II. Executive Summary
Funding and Aims of Project






This report presents summary findings from the project ΥReconciliation and
Peace Economics in CyrusΦ (April 2010 Π February 2012).
The project was funded by the EuropeAid Cypriot Civil Society in Action II
programme aiming to promote Υa conducive environment for the further
development of trust, dialogue, cooperation and closer relationship between
the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities...Φ
Funding was as Stream C support for ΥNGOs and international organisations
promoting reconciliation projects including research leading to a better
understanding of issues affecting trust between the two communities.Φ
From the start of project, it was apparent that there was little hope for a
settlement and the project concluded as the UN-sponsored talks again failed.

Project Activities





Activities involved research, dialogue and dissemination.
Research in Cyprus was based on: a general household survey; a crossingpoint survey; focus groups; and interviews. All research took place on both
sides of the Green Line.
Dialogue took place in four symposia and one bi-communal event.
Dissemination has taken place through provision of findings at a bicommunal event and this report. There were also meetings with personnel
from NGOs and overseas missions in Cyprus.

The EU Context



The Republic of Cyprus is highly unusual as an EU member which does not
have full control over its constitutionally claimed territory.
The Green Line Regulation severely restricts the scope of trade and movement
between the Republic of Cyprus and northern Cyprus.

Reconciliation




The two communities do not agree on what the Cyprus problem is and there
is little agreement about arrangements for a post-solution state.
There is marked reluctance to recognise the other side, as well as interact even
with the checkpoints open.
Most Cypriots do not cross the Green Line or have only done so once or twice,
so bi-communal contact is limited to a small percentage of the population.

5








There is notable societal mistrust both within as well as between communities.
There is suspicion about political leadership and the direction of the talks.
While the Turkish Cypriot community tends to view the cause of the Cyprus
problem as an issue between the communities, the Greek Cypriot community
tends to view the cause as external.
Given this fundamental disagreement, it is highly problematic from the outset
to effectively apply reconciliation initiatives.
The low level of interaction and interdependence between the communities
also means that a starting point of moves towards reconciliation is absent.
EU policy in Cyprus could more usefully at this time move to addressing
societal trust issues within each community rather than between them.

Peace Economics










Both Cypriot economies are developing separately and in different directions.
Increased economic interaction may not be required for future prosperity, but
it is a crucial component to anchor an effective peace process.
While the economy of northern Cyprus is clearly weaker than that of the
Republic of Cyprus, this does not equate to actual household poverty.
Comparatively, Turkish Cypriots reported greater access to capital and a
greater ability to save money than Greek Cypriots.
Each side engages in different activity when they cross; Greek Cypriots tend
to visit places of interest, worship or their familiesΦ former home areas, while
Turkish Cypriots more often shop, consume and access public hospitals.
Greek Cypriots especially are resistant to spending money in the north to
avoid supporting its economy, and spend less than Turkish Cypriots crossing.
Significant regulatory obstacles to economic interaction remain in place, while
economic relations cannot be divorced from considerations of social trust.
Substantive change in economic relations depends on political movement and
a transformation of the rules of engagement across the Green Line.
Assumptions about the relative strengths and weaknesses of both
communitiesΦ economies need to be realistically re-examined.

Delivery





Evaluation of the project confirms that the research and dissemination
elements were appropriate. However, dialogue was less successful.
There is a lack of wide interest in attending participatory events, in part
because the Cyprus talks have dragged on for so long without result.
The number of projects and events funded by the EU and others suggests that
project fatigue detracts from significant interest in individual events.
With no apparent programme coordination among the Cypriot Civil Society
in Action projects, the EU is not making best use of its EuropeAid investment.

6

III. Project Introduction (M. K. Flynn)
This report presents summary findings to the EU from the project ΥReconciliation
and Peace Economics in CyprusΦ (April 2010 Π February 2012). Dr. M.K. Flynn, on
behalf of the University of the West of England (UWE), Bristol (UK) ran the project
with the support of UWE colleagues Dr. Tony King, Prof. Derek Braddon and
Christian Dadomo.

Additional work and services were provided mainly by

Cypriots and Cypriot organizations and paid by project funds. While the EU,
through EuropeAid, provided financial support, the projectΦs development,
implementation and conclusion were left solely to the project team. EU personnel
exercised no editorial influence over this report, and maintained a hands-off
approach to project execution throughout.
This project was awarded €212,997.08 under EuropeAidΦs Cypriot Civil Society in
Action II programme (€2.5 million) which aims to promote Υa conducive
environment for the further development of trust, dialogue, cooperation and closer
relationship between the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities as an
important step towards a solution to the Cyprus problem.Φ Specifically funding was
allocated from Stream C support (€500,000) earmarked for ΥNGOs and international
organisations promoting reconciliation projects including research leading to a better
understanding of issues affecting trust between the two communities.Φ The funding
call went out in June 2008. The concept note (first stage of the application process)
was due in September 2008. Successful applicants were invited to submit full
applications for February 2009, and funding awards were announced in October
2009. This project commenced six months later.
The UWE project team comprised an interdisciplinary set of scholars with
backgrounds primarily in politics, history, economics and law. The researchers had a
broad range of country and regional familiarity, including not only Cyprus but also
Northern Ireland, Israel, southern Africa, the former USSR and Yugoslavia, as well
as a number of EU countries (especially Greece, France, Spain, Ireland and the UK).

7

Project execution revolved around three broad sets of activities: research; dialogue;
and dissemination. Research throughout the project involved the primary work of
surveys, focus groups and interviews in Cyprus, as well as the secondary work of
desk-based research using printed and electronic materials. Dialogue with Cypriots
about research in progress took place in four symposia (two TCC and two GCC;
May-June 2011) and one larger bi-communal event (October 2011).1 Dissemination
was undertaken through this report, and at the bi-communal event by way of a
discussion document in English, Greek and Turkish, and presentations with
provision for simultaneous translation. There was also a number of meetings
(January Π February 2012) to discuss project outcomes with personnel from NGOs
and overseas missions in Cyprus.
With regards to primary research, much of the data Π in addition to semi-structured
interviews - was drawn from three sources: a) a general household survey; b) a
crossing-point survey; and c) focus groups.
a) One general household survey, applied to both the GCC and TCC, was based on
representative sampling of 600 persons on each side (total 1,200) and took place 8 Π
16 June 2010. In the RoC respondents were in Nicosia, Limassol, Larnaca, Famagusta
district and Paphos; in northern Cyprus respondents were in Nicosia, Famagusta,
Kyrenia/Girne, Morphou/Güzelyurt and Iskele.
Data was collected through individual interviews of forty-five minutes each and
solicited responses to questions relevant to both the reconciliation and economic
themes. Participants were selected through the stratification of urban and rural areas
based on the Republic of CyprusΦs 2001 census, and northern CyprusΦs State
Planning OrganisationΦs 2006 geographical distribution percentages. The next stage
involved random selection of primary sampling units, and thereafter random

1 The bi-communal event was a collaborative effort at the Home for Cooperation (Nicosia) in the U.N.

Buffer Zone. The event, ΥBuilding Trust: Civil Society, Trade and CooperationΦ (20-21 October 2011),
was undertaken in cooperation with INTRAC (www.intrac.org) and its EuropeAid project
ΥDeveloping Trust and Cooperation: Research to Improve Civil Society Practice.Φ

8

selection of households. The respondent within a household was chosen on the
grounds of the most recent birthday. Significantly almost all GCC respondents, 597
of 600, identified themselves Cypriots but only 528 of 600 from the TCC sample did.
The overwhelming remainder from the TCC set were identified as TO.
Also noteworthy is that the GCC sample was considerably older than the TCC one.
The age factor inevitably impacts on the data collected and subsequent analyses.
Summer 2010 general household survey
Age

GCC %

TCC %

18-25

9.3

24.2

26-45

31.5

49.0

46-65

39.8

23.0

66+

19.3

3.8

b) One crossing-point survey of 1,000 persons was undertaken on each side (total:
2,000) at checkpoints in Nicosia. (28 June Π 23 July 2010; Ledra Street / Lokmaci Π
pedestrians; Agios Dometios / Metehan / Kermia Π pedestrians and vehicles; and
Ledra Palace Π pedestrians on the northern side only).
Data was based on five-minute interviews to elicit responses primarily about
economic issues. Noted here is that, of the seven open crossings, only three Π those in
Nicosia used for this survey Π are in an urban area. The other four are rural, and two
of those pass through Dhekelia Sovereign Base (UK) between Famagusta and
Larnaca. It is noteworthy that, of those surveyed crossing from the GCC side, 15%
identified themselves as neither Cypriot nor Greek Cypriot. Crossings from the TCC
side were more demographically uniform with 95% born on the island. It should be
noted that, while EU nationals can move freely both ways across the Green Line, the
great majority of TOs do not have the documentation allowing them to do so.

9

c) Ten focus groups were convened with five GC, four TC and one TO (GC: 7-9
February 2011, Strovolos, Nicosia; TC: 28 February Π 3 March 2011, northern Nicosia;
and TO: 4 March 2011, Famagusta). Participants were filtered by age and broad leftwing (LW), right-wing (RW) and centrist political affiliation, with the exception of
the TO group, and recruited through snowball techniques. Focus groups averaged
eight to nine participants. Members of the project team observed, with translator
when required, all focus groups.
With regard to the project context, three elements are worth noting here as
impacting on the findingsΦ relevance. First, the timeframes for the surveys (June Π
July 2010) and focus groups (February Π March 2011) exclude the likely influence on
popular opinion of, for example: the explosion at the Mari power station in July 2011
in the RoC; controversy around the discovery of offshore natural gas reserves in late
2011; and the further deepening of the economic crisis. However, findings still
provide indicative data contributing to a better understanding of issues around trust.
Second, this project was contingent on a EuropeAid funding call issued in June 2008.
A commitment to project rationale, as well as methodology, was necessarily
included in the concept note submitted in September 2008, and shortly thereafter
evaluated against the stated criteria of Υpromoting reconciliation.Φ Given that the
work concluded in February 2012, more than three and a half years elapsed between
the projectΦs inception and conclusion. This is a substantial length of time and
potentially raises questions about the relevance of project intent based on funding
criteria determined several years beforehand.
Third, and related to the point above, findings and related recommendations were to
be applicable whether or not a political settlement had been reached by the time the
project ended. However, it was abundantly clear from the start of work in Cyprus
that there was little anticipation of an imminent settlement. While some Cypriots
wanted to be hopeful and provided constructive views, few informed observers,
commentators or activists were optimistic that a settlement would be concluded.

10

This cast a pessimistic pall over the project throughout and severely tested the
funding rationale for research Υleading to a better understanding of issues affecting
trust between the two communities.Φ This is especially the case given that the project
concluded against the backdrop of a repeat failure in the UN-sponsored talks
process at Greentree, New York, late in January 2012.

11

IV. The EU Context (C. Dadomo)
This section of the report gives an overview of the legal dimension and framework
on which the search for a settlement in Cyprus currently lies. Cyprus is in a unique
situation and, although accession by a re-united Cyprus would have been the ideal
situation, its historical legacy has proven difficult to overcome. Hence the RoC
became an EU Member State in May 2004 without settlement of the Cyprus problem.
Cyprus is highly unusual as an EU Member that does not have effective control over
all areas envisaged by its own constitution. Protocol No. 10 on Cyprus to the Act of
Accession 20032 fully recognises this situation while its Preamble reaffirms the
commitment by the EU and acceding states to a comprehensive settlement. Until
such a settlement is reached, Article 1(1) of Protocol No. 10 suspends application of
the whole body of European law Υin those areas of the Republic of Cyprus in which
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus does not exercise effective control.Φ
However, this suspension - being by definition territorial - does not affect the rights
of Turkish Cypriots, who are regarded as citizens of an EU Member State, even
though they live in northern Cyprus. To this effect, on the basis of Article 2 of the
Protocol, the Council adopted Regulation No 866/2004 or the Green Line
Regulation3 on 29 April 2004 to deal with the movement of persons, goods and
services across the line. As a result of the suspension, it is down to the Green Line
Regulation to define the application of EU law provisions on the free movement of
persons. It gives authority to the RoC to Υcarry out checks on all persons crossing the
line with the aim to combat illegal immigration of third country nationals and to
detect and prevent any threat to public security and public policy.Φ These include
checks on vehicles and objects in the possession of persons. The line can be crossed
only at crossing points authorised by the competent RoC authorities. Third country

2 Official Journal of the European Community 2003, L 236 p. 955.
3 Official Journal of the European Community 2004, L 161 p. 128 as amended by Council regulation (EC)

No 587/2008 (Official Journal of the European Community 2008, L 163, p. 1).

12

nationals (i.e. persons who are not EU citizens) are only allowed to cross the line
provided that they are in possession of a residence permit or valid travel document
issued by the RoC and, if required, a valid visa for the RoC, and also do not
represent a threat to public policy or security.
In its 2011 report on the implementation of the Green Line Regulation,4 the
Commission reiterated that Υ(t)he Regulation provides for a stable legal framework
for the free movement of Cypriots, other EU citizens and third country nationals
who cross the Green Line at the crossing points.Φ But it notes that Υ(t)here was a slight
fall in the number of Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots crossing.Φ It also observes
a sharp drop in the number of non-Cypriot EU citizens and third country nationals
crossing the line compared to the previous year of reference, and a further decrease
in irregular migration across the line from northern Cyprus to the governmentcontrolled areas.
With regard to goods, the Green Line Regulation and Regulation 1480/2004 have set
out a special regime for the crossing of goods. The main principle is that ΥΙgoods
may be introduced in the areas under the effective control of the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus, on condition that they are wholly obtained in the areas not
under effective control of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.Φ Unless eligible
for export refunds or intervention measures, such goods cannot be subject to
customs duties or charges having equivalent effect, nor to a customs declaration.
Goods lawfully crossing the line are to be treated as not being imported if they are
destined for consumption in the RoC. Provided they comply with the conditions set
out in the regulation, such products have the status of EU goods and hence benefit
from free circulation within the EU.

4

Seventh Report on the Implementation of Council Regulation (EC) 866/2004 of 29 April 2004 and the
Situation Resulting from its Application Covering the Period 1 May until December 2010 (COM (2011) 284
final).

13

Although reported figures showed an annual increase in the total value of goods
crossing the line, in comparison to the previous reporting year5 (with the exception
of the last two years),6 the overall scale of Green Line trade has remained limited
owing to the narrow scope of the Regulation. Furthermore, the Commission services
keep reporting that many obstacles to trade across the line continue to exist. Notably,
according to the 2011 Annual Report, ΥTurkish Cypriot commercial vehicles, in
particular lorries above 7.5 tonnes and buses, can only move freely across the whole
island if driving licences and roadworthiness certificates are obtained in the
government-controlled areas.Φ7
However, more importantly, it is worth noting that the Green Line Regulation
appears to have failed to enable goods originating in the areas not under the control
of the RoC to penetrate the EU market. As reported in the 2007 report, Υonly in one
single case, goods crossed the Green Line and were subsequently subject to an intracommunity transaction with another Member State.Φ8 This figure increased to 3 in
2007 to come back to 1 in 2009, but no further cases were reported in the following
years. Generally, 96-97% of the trade volume across the line is intra-island trade9. If,
as the Commission reiterates in annual reports, the Υoverall conclusion is that the
Green Line Regulation continues to provide a workable basis for allowing the
passage of persons and goods to and from the government-controlled areas of the
Republic of CyprusΦ10 and if one can agree that it is an important device for bringing
the two communities closer, its overall impact could be regarded as mixed,
especially with regards to the crossing of goods.11

5 See especially Commission Report 2007, p. 11; Commission Report 2008, p. 9; and Commission Report

2009, p. 10.
6 Commission Report 2010, p. 9, and Commission Report 2011, p. 7.
7 Commission Report 2011, p. 7. See also Commission Report 2009, p. 10 and 2010, p.10.
8 Commission Report 2007, p. 11.
9 See Commission Report 2010, p. 6 and 2011, p. 5.
10 See Commission Report 2010, p.10 and 2011, p. 7.
11 In this respect, see also N. Skoutaris, ΥThe Application of the Acquis Communautaire in the Areas not
under the Effective Control of the Republic of Cyprus: the Green Line RegulationΦ (2008) 45 C. M. L.
Rev. 727, at 755.

14

As pointed out in Section VI of this report ΥΙdespite some recent progress in
economic convergence, Cyprus remains economically divided.Φ Yet, it remains
unclear whether the broadening of the scope of the Green Line Regulation or even
the adoption of further trade regulations, like the Direct Trade Regulation (assuming
the related legal and political issues are resolved), would accelerate the process of
economic convergence and integration of Cyprus since effective economic policies
have to wait on political barriers to be lifted. In this respect, given the repeated
failure of UN-sponsored talks, the EU is faced with a politico-legal challenge. This
could, however, present an opportunity for the EU to play a more active and
positive role in supporting an eventual settlement in line with the principles on
which it is built.

15

V. Reconciliation (T. King)
This section concerns questions of whether or not post-conflict reconciliation can be
applied to Cyprus as interpreted through our data. Cyprus has been physically
divided since Turkish military action responded to a Greek-inspired coup on the
island in July-August 1974. Ever since, repeated efforts to negotiate the reunification
of the island have yielded few results, and consequently the isolation of the two
communities from each other continues. For almost thirty years the Green Line was
a hermetically sealed frontier. In April 2003 the Turkish Cypriot authorities
unilaterally opened two checkpoints, an unexpected move. There was a rush of
people anxious to cross over from both sides, and there were very few incidents to
warrant ending this experiment. Since then, a total of seven checkpoints have
opened and operate twenty-four hours a day.
This section focuses especially on consideration of the potential for reconciliation
based on views regarding: the Cyprus problem; the post-solution state; recognition,
settlers/immigrants and property; societal trust; and trust in political institutions
and leadership. It draws on and complements the work done by UNFICYP;12
Kaymak, Lordos, and Tocci;13 Georgiades;14 Webster;15 Webster and Timothy;16 Sitas,
Latif and Loizou;17 and Ladisch.18 This work primarily considers attitudinal reasons

12 UNFICYP, Υ

αΗ ω
αΈ
:
α α
Έ ε α
α
Φ [The UN in Cyprus: An Inter-communal Survey of Public Opinion by UNFICYP], April

2007.
13 Erol Kaymak, Alexandros Lordos and Nathalie Tocci, Building Confidence in Peace: Public Opinion and
the Cyprus Peace Process (Brussles: Centre for European Policy Studies, 2008).
14 S.D. Georgiades, ΥPublic Attitudes Towards Peace: The Greek-Cypriot PositionΦ, Journal of Peace
Research, 44, 5, 2007, pp. 573-586.
15 Craig Webster, ΥDivision or Unification in Cyprus? The Role of Demographics, Attitudes and Party
Inclination on Greek Cypriot Preferences for a Solution to the Cyprus ProblemΦ, Ethnopolitics, 4, 3,
2005, pp. 299-309.
16 Craig Webster and Dallen J. Timothy, ΥTravelling to the ΥOther SideΦ: the Occupied Zone and Greek
Cypriot Views of Crossing the Green LineΦ, Tourism Geographies, 8, 2, 2006, pp. 162-181.
17 Ari Sitas, Dilek Latif and Natasa Loizou, Prospects of Reconciliation, Co-Existence and Forgiveness in
Cyprus in the Post-Referendum Period (Oslo: PRIO, 2007).
18 Virginie Ladisch, ΥThe Challenge of Peacebuilding: Cypriot Views on ReconciliationΦ, The Cyprus
Review, 19, 1, 2007, pp. 91-108.

16

for impediments the peace process has faced. Diplomatic obstacles to uniting the
island have been discussed elsewhere.19
Ladisch has argued that research on the Cyprus problem Υis based on the premise
that there is a conflict in Cyprus; although latent and non-violent, it is a conflict
nonetheless. In other words, there is a division that needs to be reconciled or
resolvedΦ.20 Our work, supported by the data, tends to the opinion that Cyprus is no
longer a divided society that ought to be reconciled, but could better be considered
as discrete societies that are qualitatively different. These societies have little
interaction, exhibit a marked reluctance to engage in wider cross-community activity
or commerce, and harbour deep mutual suspicion. Given that they were completely
divided for almost thirty years and have had only limited interaction since 2003, we
believe that it is of limited value now to argue that Cyprus is a single society that has
been riven asunder. Our data, especially on what the Cyprus problem is, societal
trust and the shape of a post-solution state, leads us to believe that policy direction
in Cyprus could more usefully move to addressing societal trust issues within each
community rather than between them.
Reconciliation
In a post-conflict situation, reconciliation is commonly understood to mean that once
Υthere is a common understanding of each communityΦs views about the past Ι
reconciliation involves an acknowledgement of the other.Φ21 Programmes to effect
reconciliation are generally undertaken in societies that have suffered some kind of
severe domestic trauma or dislocation, such as civil conflict or dictatorship. In some
cases, truth commissions have been set up to lustrate aspects of that trauma as a way
to enable not only personal healing, but also judicial and institutional processes that

19

See for example: James Ker-Lindsay, EU Accession and UN Peacemaking in Cyprus (Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2005); and Michális S. Michael, Resolving the Cyprus Conflict: Negotiating History
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).
20 Ladisch, ΥThe Challenge of PeacebuildingΦ, p. 97.
21 Ladisch, ΥThe Challenge of PeacebuildingΦ, p. 98.

17

may or may not include prosecutions. Common premises throughout are that
reconciliation should contribute to a societyΦs post-trauma cohesion, and that
understanding the otherΦs point of view is a prerequisite.22 Reconciliation initiatives
generally do not take place in a society that has suffered outside invasion or
occupation.
Moves towards reconciliation do not happen in a vacuum. They have to be
supported by recognised organs of society and the state, because they must be seen
to be legitimate. They invariably take place where the perpetrators and their victims
continue to live in the same society. While outside experts are frequently involved in
reconciliation programmes, these initiatives work best if they are locally inspired
and grounded so that the society emerging from conflict can claim ownership of the
process and its results. The purpose of reconciliation is not only to reveal
wrongdoing or expose abuses, but also to draw a line under the conflict by
providing a framework of common experience of the conflict. In essence, it marks
the end of the transition process, not just one more step on the road. Unlike certain
types of truth commission, reconciliation does not generally suggest a prosecutorial
remit.
There are several salient issues concerning reconciliation in Cyprus. Post-conflict
reconciliation is considered a way of ending the transition period from conflict.
Therefore, is there a sense that Cyprus is actually emerging from conflict? Will the
perpetrators and victims live in a single society? Can each community acknowledge
the viewpoint and suffering of the other, and do the organs and institutions of the
state support this initiative? Or could the status quo continue in perpetuity?
Cyprus is complicated because the roots of its division are simultaneously internal
and external, and there is fundamental disagreement over what caused the Cyprus

22 See Priscilla B. Hayner, Unspeakable Truths: Facing the Challenge of Truth Commissions (London:

Routledge, 2002); and Robert I. Rotberg and Dennis Thompson (eds.), Truth v. Justice: The Morality of
Truth Commissions (Princeton NJ: Princeton UP, 2000).

18

problem. Of the two main communities on the island, the GCC maintains that
division was mainly caused by outside invasion and the interests of foreign powers.
The TCC, on the other hand, primarily believes that it was caused by the existence of
two communities and nationalist tensions between them. Both contain a large
element of truth, and, bolstered by decadesΦ worth of education and public
discourse, are consequently hard to dislodge, as we discovered in our focus groups.
These competing narratives expose how keenly both communities feel about their
own perceived insecurity. Indeed, the lack of violent conflict notwithstanding, the
underlying sense from our interviews and contacts was that Υthe Cyprus problemΦ
was shorthand for ΥsecurityΦ. This was corroborated by focus groups from both sides,
and also confirms UNFICYPΦs findings from 2007.
Furthermore, reconciliation initiatives will be of limited utility if there is no need for
either side to acknowledge the point of view of the other. This is especially relevant
concerning the GCC viewpoint, because if they believe that the cause of the problem
was external, then reconciliation initiatives fundamentally cannot apply to them. The
very low level of interaction and interdependence between north and south means
that the starting point of moves towards reconciliation, namely a single society
divided through domestic conflict, is also largely absent.
The Cyprus Problem
In the general household survey we asked what were the three major issues that
Cyprus faces at present. Not surprisingly Υthe Cyprus problemΦ was the top response
(42%)

from

both

communities,

followed

by

Υthe

economic

crisisΦ

and

ΥunemploymentΦ (Figure 1). Therefore, despite growing economic unease, the
Cyprus problem came top of both communitiesΦ responses. Our focus groups also
discussed the Cyprus problem, and there was consensus, especially among GCs, that
it was something that they had become habituated to thinking of as the islandΦs
biggest issue, but which did not actually affect their everyday life. ΥWe have our own
problems; we donΦt bother with the Cyprus problem but itΦs at the back of our mindΦ

19

(GC 18-35 RW). This sentiment was largely echoed by TC focus groups. Meanwhile,
the TO focus group strongly felt that their right to live in Cyprus was continually
questioned by all sides, and they lacked any representation at the talks.
Interestingly, survey results indicate that the Cyprus problem is a primary issue
more for younger respondents from the TCC and older ones from the GCC (Figure
2). To the former, the northΦs liminality continues to pose obstacles regarding
opportunities both within and outside the territory. For the latter, there is the issue
of living memory of conflict and dispossession. Younger GCs tend not to see
compelling reasons why the conflict should continue to be at the top of the political
agenda, and older TCs often consider Turkish actions in 1974 as deliverance from the
threat of violence by GC groups. As one interviewee stated, for GCs 1974 was a
sudden rupture and dislocation that marked the start of history; for TCs, the
intervention of the Turkish military on their behalf marked the end of history.
One of the fundamental reasons why the conflict has proved intractable is that
neither community agrees on what the Cyprus problem is, and each sideΦs narratives
have left little room for negotiation. In the general household survey, we asked what
respondents thought was the primary cause of the Cyprus problem. Opinions
diverged sharply, and there was no broad agreement as to what caused the islandΦs
division in the first place. GCC respondents believed it was chiefly down to the
machinations and military involvement of foreign powers. TCC respondents,
conversely, believed it was mainly due to nationalistic elements of the two
communities (Figure 3). Further analysis of the data also revealed that this opinion
was shared by a surprisingly large number of GCs aged 66+ who would remember
the communal violence of the early 1960s. This divergence is mirrored in similarly
intractable opinions on what the shape and structure of a post-solution Cyprus
should be, as will be discussed below.
The danger is that the longevity of the Cyprus problem has allowed these competing
narratives to assume overriding legitimacy and hence ossify the process. GCC

20

respondents primarily place responsibility for the Cyprus problem on invasion by a
foreign power (37.5%) and the machinations of foreign powers (35%). This strongly
suggests that they consider GCs themselves as powerless and blameless. TCC
respondents, on the other hand, thought that the problem had been caused by the
existence of two communities (46.2%), and to a lesser extent on their respective
nationalistic elements (20.1%). This indicates that for the TCC blame for the problem
is largely domestic. Therefore, the two communities are qualitatively different in how
they view the fundamental problem, and there are few signs of convergence or
mutual understanding.
Furthermore and although the checkpoints are now open, it appears that that most
Cypriots do not cross often and the rate of people crossing has, in fact, sloped off in
recent years (see Section IV above). While the TCC sample included a minority of
TOs who are unable to cross into the RoC, all GCC participants possessed the right
papers to travel north. Yet only a minority did so with any regularity at all (Figures 4
and 5). As one source commented, the two communities are no longer curious about
one another.
The pattern of crossing is different as well. While GCs tend not to cross to make a
political or ethical point, most TCC respondents who had not crossed said it was
simply because it had not happened yet or that they were unable to do so (Figure 6).
It should be emphasised that in both the GCC and TCC samples, a very large
proportion either had never crossed or crossed only once. Of the GCC respondents,
just over 60% had either never crossed or done so only once. Of the TCC sample, just
under half had never crossed or only crossed once. Only 1.2% of the GCC and 5.8%
of the TCC crossed once a week or more. Regarding the emotional impact of crossing
the Green Line, large numbers of GCs in particular reported that they had stopped
crossing because it left them sad and with negative feelings, in complete contrast to
TC respondents (Figure 7).

21

In other words, the proportion of both communities who regularly access the other
side is very small, and GCs in particular have emotional, political and ethical reasons
for not accessing the other side. This suggests that Cyprus has become, in essence,
separate societies. It should also be noted that although seven checkpoints are now
open, only three are in an urban area (Nicosia), and of those only one (Ledra
St./Lokmaci) is situated in a busy part of town easily accessible by foot. In other
words, the Green Line and its checkpoints are not, in fact, a part of most peopleΦs
everyday life.23
The Post-Solution State
As well as fundamental disagreement over what caused the Cyprus problem, the
GCC and TCC disagree over what shape the post-solution state should take.
Underpinning their opinions is the issue of security, which became apparent in our
focus groups on both sides. GCs fear the Turkish military and TCs are apprehensive
about a central government that might be dominated by GCs, as well as their
minority status within Cyprus without the security afforded by TurkeyΦs presence.
Much of the UN-sponsored talks process has been dominated by discussions about
what kind of unitary, federal or confederal/bi-communal model a post-solution
Cyprus would follow. According to general household survey results, the status quo
with checkpoints open was largely unacceptable for the GCC (73.2%), while the TCC
found it an acceptable compromise (69.5%) (Figure 8). Both sides found the status
quo with closed crossing points unacceptable (GCC 59.3%, TCC 52%) (Figure 9).
The option on the table is for a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation. The GCC tended to
favour a single unitary state with equal rights for all Cypriots Π which would almost
certainly be dominated by GCs given their demographic superiority Π to the
exclusion of other options. The TCC, on the other hand, demonstrated a more

23 Thanks to Dr Ahmet Sözen for highlighting this point.

22

nuanced response. A unitary state with equal rights for all citizens (no mention of
preferred form of government) was favoured by 58% (Figure 10). While the TCC
support for a unitary state in which they would be the minority seems high, the
inclusion of the wording Υequal rightsΦ, strongly suggesting protection against
domination by the GCC, would have pushed up the approval for a unitary state in
this case.24
The option of a weak federation with strong constituent states was unpopular
(Figure 11), while that of a strong federal government with weak constituent states
was less so (Figure 12). The option of two independent states was rejected
overwhelmingly by the GCC, whereas it was the most popular option for the TCC
(Figure 13). However, focus group data suggested that, in fact, people do not
necessarily think in great detail about the structure of a post-solution Cyprus,
although a number of GCs clearly wished for a return to how it was Υlike in the past
when we had controlΦ (GC 40+ centrist).
More broadly, the GCC in particular was divided about making crossing easier and
opening more crossing points (Figures 14 and 15). These particular questions are
relevant because, in the absence of progress in the talks, the status quo with open
checkpoints is what will remain. As Yakinthou argues, it has outlasted almost forty
years of negotiations and, if it continues, will cement the de facto partition.25 One
interviewee commented that the current situation may not be ideal, but it is very
stable. Others contended that the open crossing points and lack of incident have
normalised the division; one in particular argued that the UN Buffer Zone at the
Ledra Palace crossing point, where various bi-communal events take place, had
become an accepted third space.

24 Thanks to Alexandros Lordos for pointing out the complexity of the responses.

25 Christalla Yakinthou, ΥA never-ending story: CyprusΦ, in Stefan Wolff and Christalla Yakinthou

(eds.), Conflict Management in Divided Societies: Theories and Practice (London: Routledge, 2012), p. 245.

23

Recognition, Settlers/Immigrants and Property
Recognising the other sideΦs existence is obviously a crucial element of any solution.
The north is unrecognised internationally, which poses practical problems regarding
raising money or trading legitimately: ΥOur state is not free and independentΦ (TC
35+ LW). It is also an issue concerning access to (and by) international institutions
and best practice Π two interviewees commented, by way of an example, that the
north cannot access UNESCO to aid the protection of antiquities. Avoiding anything
that could imply recognition or acknowledgement of the other side has become an
article of faith, especially among GCs. For example, we asked whether university
degrees and school qualifications from the other side should be recognised.
Unsurprisingly, a large majority of the GCC (71.9%) argued that no qualifications
from the north should be recognised. Conversely, most TCC respondents (56.5%) felt
that qualifications from the south should be recognised (Figure 16).
On a similar note, we asked whether it was acceptable to buy goods and services
from the other side, which would effectively confer recognition for anything above
small-scale ad hoc transactions. Again, almost two-thirds of the GCC exhibited
widespread resistance, as did almost half the TCC (Figure 17). This strongly suggests
that the GCC largely accept the continuation of an effective boycott of the north. The
TCC, on the other hand, while preferring not to buy goods and services from the
south, are more willing to accept its degrees and qualifications. We would argue that
willingness to both trade and recognise educational qualifications are basic
prerequisites for a single state to function; the level of societal resistance to such
reciprocity discourages optimism.
On the divisive question of what should happen to TOs and their children living in
the north, opinion was sharply divided. Almost half (45.7%) the GCC sample
thought that all first-generation arrivals should leave, although a large minority
(37.5%) believed that a TO married to a TC could stay. TCC respondents
overwhelmingly (72.7%) thought that all first-generation TOs should remain (Figure

24

18). On the question of TOsΦ children, over two-fifths (41.3%) of the GCC sample
responded that they should leave, while almost a third (30%) argued that those with
one TC parent could stay. Meanwhile TCC participants argued - by a large majority that all children of first-generation TOs should stay (Figure 19). Focus groups on
both sides equated the demographic question here with security. Both sides
expressed alarm at being ΥoverrunΦ Π GCs by TCs and TOs, and the TCs by the GCsΦ
demographic superiority, as well as by increasing immigration from Turkey. It is
significant that returning to the demographic balance of 1974 is considered a red line
by GC negotiators.
Similarly, the issue of restitution of, or compensation for, property lost or
appropriated during the division of Cyprus is controversial. Both the GCC and TCC
samples countenanced compensation, with few respondents arguing that no
compensation should be paid at all. The GCC was more likely to want an actual
property, while the TCC largely preferred cash compensation (Figure 20). However,
on the question of what compensation should be paid to those vacating properties
that were to be returned, GCC respondents was much less likely to support any kind
of compensation than those from the TCC (Figure 21).
Societal Trust
The issue of societal trust in Cyprus has usually been taken as referring to trust
between TCs and GCs, to the extent that it overrides questions of trust within each
community. Our data suggests that trust within each community is low, and
therefore it is understandable that they exhibit mistrust towards the other side, quite
apart from the issue of the division of Cyprus. This also resonates with our data
suggesting a high level of mistrust - especially within the GCC - regarding the role of
international actors in the talks process, as will be discussed below.
The general household survey tabled a range of queries touching on interpersonal
issues and found that both the GCC and TCC exhibit notable levels of mistrust. In
response to the question ΥDo you think most people would try to take advantage of

25

you?Φ, 80.9% of the GCC sample answered ΥDefinitelyΦ or ΥProbablyΦ, indicating that
the overwhelming majority are distrustful of people in general. The corresponding
figure from the TCC was 56.8%, lower but still a majority (Figure 22). Interestingly,
when the question was phrased ΥDo you think most [from the other community] would
try to take advantage of you?Φ, the GCC score for ΥDefinitely/ProbablyΦ was little
different at 81.9%. However, the TCC score jumped to 79.4% (Figure 23). In essence,
four-fifths of both the GCC and TCC believe that members of the other community
will try to take advantage of them personally, although the GCC is more generally
distrustful.
Regarding the straightforward question ΥDo you trust the other community?,Φ about
two-thirds from both samples answered ΥNo.Φ However the GCC sample was only
half as likely to answer ΥYesΦ as the TCC (GCC 8%, TCC 16.5%). (Figure 24) Almost
half of both the GCC and TCC respondents disagreed with the statement ΥI feel
members of the GCC/TCC have grown more trusting of us over timeΦ (Figure 25).
Meanwhile, a significant minority (GCC 37.6%, TCC 24.2%) feels unwelcome when
they cross the Green Line (Figure 26).
To get a sense of how an integrated Cypriot society and economy might work, we
asked how people would feel about having a boss from the other community; a
majority of neither the GCC (59.7%) nor TCC (63.8%) samples found this acceptable
(Figure 27). The GCC were also unwilling (43%) to have a foreign boss from outside
Cyprus, whereas TCC respondents were not necessarily averse (Figure 28). Outside
of the power relationship that working for a boss from the other community or
overseas entails, we asked about whether having GC, TC and foreign neighbours
was acceptable. Our data showed that both the GCC and TCC were more willing to
countenance foreign neighbours than those of the other community, a feeling more
pronounced among TCC respondents (Figures 29 and 30). Both GCC and TCC
respondents were also more willing to accept their sibling or child marrying a
foreigner than someone of the other community (Figures 31 and 32).

26

As part of exploring trust issues, we also asked whether Cyprus should have a truth
commission and whether it should be comprised of Cypriots, outside experts or
both. Both the TCC and GCC broadly agreed that such a commission should take
place, and both very broadly accepted that it could have foreign members as well as
Cypriots (Figures 33 and 34). However, truth commission discourse is low-profile in
Cyprus, and we add the caveat that, as one prominent interviewee made clear, both
communities see such a commission mainly as a way of confirming their own version
of history. This is very much at odds with the accepted reasoning for a truth
commission, which is to acknowledge the other sideΦs point of view.
Overall our data strongly suggests that the greater and easier contact between TCs
and GCs over the last few years has not translated into increased levels of trust, with
most from both communities answering that their levels of trust had actually
diminished or remained the same. When asked about the influence of contact on
their degree of trust, almost half of both GCC (46.1%) and TCC (49%) respondents
said increased contact had, in fact, negatively affected their trust. Only a minority
indicated that trust had improved through more contact, although there is
noteworthy variation as over a quarter of TCC respondents thought their level of
trust had improved, compared to just over 10% from the GCC (Figure 35).
Trust in Political Institutions and Leadership
According to our data, the GCC generally believes that political parties (44.7%) and
their president (39.2%) wielded the most political influence in the RoC. Regarding
who had most influence in northern Cyprus, the GCC also thought Turkey (80.8%)
and the Turkish army (35%) were the most influential. TCC respondents believed
that in northern Cyprus political decisions were most heavily influenced by Turkey
(63%), followed by the northΦs own government (30%). TCC respondents also
thought the political decisions in the RoC were most influenced by the church
(42.2%) closely followed by Greece (38%) (Figure 36). Nevertheless, whoever is
thought to influence the political process most in either community is not necessarily

27

seen as representative. Both GCC and TCC respondents believed that their political
leadership formed policies and strategies without consulting their supporters
(Figure 37).
With regards to the talks process, some four-fifths of the GCC sample were likely to
believe that it was driven mostly or exclusively by the interests of foreign powers.
Conversely, TCC respondents were more likely to argue that political leadership of
the two communities was driving the process (Figure 38). The GCC opinion - that
the talks are mostly or exclusively directed by outside powers - suggests two things.
First, the average GC feels a high level of disconnection with the talks process,
something echoed in the focus groups. Second, the GCC does not view itself as
responsible for the direction the talks take, a point especially relevant after decades
of failed negotiations. The TCC result, on the other hand, shows a higher level of
trust in their own leadership.
However, more than one interviewee commented that the political leadership on
both sides has a high level of inertia. They argued that the negotiations have become
an independent dynamic of their own, and that continuation meant that key players
could keep ownership, control and status. Some focus group participants reiterated
this sentiment: ΥI hate to see politicians taking advantage of the situation, living from
it.Φ (GC 18-35 LW)
Conclusion
Our data indicates that the two communities in Cyprus hold qualitatively different
views and opinions. They exist separately with little interaction and virtually no
interdependence. Thus space for convergence in any solution is extremely limited.
Moreover, our data supported by fieldwork suggest that there is little societal or
political will to use that space for convergence. While virtually all our interviewees
want a solution, and most of them were engaging actively with the process, they
were all pessimistic about the prospects of one emerging in the foreseeable future.

28

Our data demonstrates that even the causes of CyprusΦs division are contentious.
The questions of personal trust regarding relations with the other community might
be expected to point to mutual suspicion, but these attitudes are supported by
similar levels of mistrust within each community. Our view is that, if each
community displays a high level of mistrust towards its own members and
leadership, it is highly unlikely that it will express less mistrust towards the other
side. The mistrust between the two sides is grounded in mistrust within each.
We believe therefore that Cyprus is not entirely ready for reconciliation measures.
The two communities exhibit entrenched and qualitatively different views about the
cause, nature and urgency of the Cyprus problem. Meanwhile, people on both sides
demonstrate little confidence in their own political leadership. Social attitudes that
have developed for decades show little sign of softening, and there is little space in
which to challenge received wisdom. All this poses a challenge to finding common
ground for engaging in the necessary dialogue in which each side not only talks but
acknowledges the otherΦs concerns and interests.

29

Figure 1 (all figures from the General Household Survey)
Can you tell me which three are the major issues that our society faces at present?
(first response)
GCC

TCC

30

Figure 2
The importance of the Cyprus problem by age
GCC

TCC

31

Figure 3
Do you consider the Cyprus problem to be primarily…
GCC

TCC

32

Figure 4
GCC
Since the opening of the crossing points, have you visited the other
side? IF YES: How often?
Valid
Cumulative
Frequency Percent
Percent
Percent
4-5 times a week
1
.2
.2
.2
2-3 times a week
Once a week
Once a month
Once every two
months
Four times a year
Three times a year
Twice a year
Less often
I only ever visited
once
No/ Never
Total

1
5
7
5

.2
.8
1.2
.8

.2
.8
1.2
.8

.3
1.2
2.3
3.2

18
11
49
140

3.0
1.8
8.2
23.3

3.0
1.8
8.2
23.3

6.2
8.0
16.2
39.5

149

24.8

24.8

64.3

214
600

35.7
100.0

35.7
100.0

100.0

33

Figure 5
TCC
Since the opening of the crossing points, have you visited the other
side? IF YES: How often?
Valid
Cumulative
Frequency Percent Percent
Percent
Daily
7
1.2
1.2
1.2
4-5 times a week
2-3 times a week
Once a week
Three times a
month
Once every two
weeks
Once a month
Once every two
months

5
11
17
34

.8
1.8
2.8
5.7

.8
1.9
2.9
5.7

2.0
3.9
6.8
12.5

8

1.3

1.4

13.9

45
38

7.5
6.3

7.6
6.4

21.5
27.9

Four times a year
Three times a year
Twice a year
Less often
I only ever visited
once
No/Never
Total
Missing
Total

35
29
43
22
32

5.8
4.8
7.2
3.7
5.3

5.9
4.9
7.3
3.7
5.4

33.8
38.7
45.9
49.7
55.1

266
592
8
600

44.3
98.7
1.3
100.0

44.9
100.0

100.0

34

Figure 6
Are there some specific reasons for which you haven’t visited the other side?
GCC

TCC

35

Figure 7
The emotional effect of crossing to the other side left me feeling sad and with
negative feelings so I stopped visiting.
GCC

TCC

36

Figure 8
What is your position on the following possible forms of solution to the Cyprus
issue? Do you completely reject it, ACCEPT it as a compromise, or consider it very
satisfactory?
GCC

TCC

Status quo with open crossing points

37

Figure 9
What is your position on the following possible forms of solution to the Cyprus
issue? Do you completely reject it, ACCEPT it as a compromise, or consider it very
satisfactory?
GCC

TCC

Status quo with closed crossing points

38

Figure 10
What is your position on the following possible forms of solution to the Cyprus
issue? Do you completely reject it, ACCEPT it as a compromise, or consider it very
satisfactory?
GCC

TCC

One unitary state with equal rights for all Cypriot citizens

39

Figure 11
What is your position on the following possible forms of solution to the Cyprus
issue? Do you completely reject it, ACCEPT it as a compromise, or consider it very
satisfactory?
-

GCC

TCC

A federal solution with a weak central government and two strong
constituent states.

40

Figure 12
What is your position on the following possible forms of solution to the Cyprus
issue? Do you completely reject it, ACCEPT it as a compromise, or consider it very
satisfactory?
-

GCC

TCC

A federal solution with a strong central government and two weak
constituent states.

41

Figure 13
What is your position on the following possible forms of solution to the Cyprus
issue? Do you completely reject it, ACCEPT it as a compromise, or consider it very
satisfactory?
GCC

TCC

Two independent, internationally recognised states.

42

Figure 14
Steps should be taken to make crossing to the other side easier
GCC

TCC

43

Figure 15
I would like to see more crossing points opening in the near future
GCC

TCC

44

Figure 16
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means “totally
acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you personally to
recognise degrees and qualifications from schools on the other side?
GCC

TCC

45

Figure 17
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means “totally
acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you personally to buy
goods and services from TC companies and people
GCC

On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means “totally
acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you personally to buy
goods and services from GC companies and people
TCC

46

Figure 18
Which of the following statements comes closer to your opinion with respect to
what should happen with first generation settlers from Turkey to TRNC/occupied
areas following a settlement?
GCC

TCC

47

Figure 19
Which of the following statements comes closer to your opinion with respect to
what should happen with the children of settlers from Turkey to TRNC/occupied
areas following a settlement?
GCC

TCC

48

Figure 20
Given that a compromise between the two communities is reached, what do you
believe is the most appropriate course of action for compensating people who will
not be returning to their properties?
GCC

TCC

49

Figure 21
And with respect to the people who will have to move out of properties they are
currently using because they will be returned to the original owners? What do you
believe is the most appropriate course of action for compensating these people?
GCC

TCC

50

Figure 22
Do you think most people in general would try to take advantage of you if they
got a chance, or would they try to be fair?
GCC

TCC

51

Figure 23
GCC: Do you think most TCs would try to take advantage of you if they got a
chance, or would they try to be fair?

TCC: Do you think most GCs would try to take advantage of you if they got a
chance, or would they try to be fair?

52

Figure 24
On a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means “not at all” and 5 means “completely”, to
what extent, would you say that you trust the other community?
GCC

TCC

53

Figure 25
I feel member of the other community have grown more trusting of us over time
GCC

TCC

54

Figure 26
I feel welcome when I visit the other side
GCC

TCC

55

Figure 27
GCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means
“totally acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you to have a
TC boss?

TCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means
“totally acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you to have a
GC boss?

56

Figure 28
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means “totally
acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you to have a
foreigner as a boss?
GCC

TCC

57

Figure 29
GCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means
“totally acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you to have
TC neighbours?

TCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means
“totally acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you to have
GC neighbours?

58

Figure 30
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means “totally
acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you to have foreign
neighbours?
GCC

TCC

59

Figure 31
GCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means
“totally acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for your
children/sibling to marry a TC

TCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means
“totally acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for your
children/sibling to marry a GC

60

Figure 32
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means “totally
acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for your children/sibling
to marry a foreigner?
GCC

TCC

61

Figure 33
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “Not at all acceptable” and 5 means “totally
acceptable” how acceptable or unacceptable would it be for you personally for an
independent body to prepare an unbiased and comprehensive report of what
happened in the past?
GCC

TCC

62

Figure 34
If an independent body was set up to examine what has occurred in the past in
order to provide a comprehensive and unbiased report on events, would you
prefer that such a body were…
GCC

TCC3

63

Figure 35
On a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means “very negatively” and 5 means “very
positively”, to what extent, would you say, that your contact with people on the
other side has influenced positively or negatively the degree to which you trust
the other community?
GCC

TCC

64

Figure 36 (top four answers only)
GCC: Who do you think influences political decisions in the GCC?

Political parties
The people
The government
The president

Yes
228
107
106
62

No
372
493
494
538

Total
600
600
600
600

GCC: Who do you think influences political decisions in the TCC?

Turkey
The Turkish army
The government
Political parties
The TC army

Yes
254
157
47
31
31

No
346
443
553
569
569

Total
600
600
600
600
600

TCC: Who do you think influences political decisions in the GCC?

The church
Greece
The president
The government

Yes
253
228
184
168

No
341
366
410
426

Total
594
594
594
594

TCC: Who do you think influences political decisions in the TCC?

Turkey
The president
Political parties
The government

Yes
378
171
108
108

No
216
423
414
414

Total
594
594
594
594

65

Figure 37
GCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “I totally disagree” and 5 means “I
totally agree” to what extent do you agree that the leaderships of political parties
in the GCC formulate policies and strategies without consulting their supporters?

TCC: On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “I totally disagree” and 5 means “I totally
agree” to what extent do you agree that the leaderships of political parties in the
TCC formulate policies and strategies without consulting their supporters?

66

Figure 38
With respect to the Cyprus problem and the direction of the discussions do you
believe that ...
1. The process is driven and directed SOLELY by the political leadership of the two
communities
2. The process is driven to a LARGE EXTENT by the political leadership of the two
communities and to a SMALL EXTENT by foreign powers
3. The process is driven to a SMALL EXTENT by the political leadership of the two
communities and to a LARGE EXTENT by foreign powers
4. The process is driven and directed SOLELY by foreign powers
GC

TCC

67

VI. Peace Economics (D. Braddon and T. King)
This section of the report focuses on the economic dimension of the project. Peace
economics examines the extent to which economic factors can help explain conflict
and also be incorporated into an effective reconciliation process. This involves taking
into account the role of economic activity in promoting peace by establishing and
maintaining mutual interests, such as considering economic integration, the role of
business and the relationship between peace and levels of prosperity.
Therefore the role of economics envisioned here is not as a single factor divorced
from political and social change. Rather, it is viewed as a supportive and important
complement to other developments. While enhanced cross-line trade may not be
essential for the future of both communities, it is crucial for the holistic anchoring of
an effective peace process. Coverage below looks specifically at a range of issues
regarding perceptions of economic problems, personal circumstances, management
and business relationships, and cross-line activity. This section draws on and adds to
work on cross-line trade undertaken by: Hatay, Mullen and Kalimeri;26 Jacobson,
Musyck, Orphanides and Webster;27 Mullen, Oğuz and Kyriacou;28 Çilsal, Kyriacou
and Mullen;29 and Trimikliniotis.30 It also draws on the report by Sureç and Akifler.31
However, we first must acknowledge that economic circumstances in both the RoC
and northern Cyprus are also significantly impacted by factors outside the island.
Any emphasis on the absolute necessity of encouraging trade across the Green Line
as concomitant to future prosperity in Cyprus rests on two, possibly contentious,

M. Hatay, F. Mullen and J. Kalimeri, Intra-island trade in Cyprus: Obstacles, oppositions and
psychological barriers (Oslo: PRIO, 2008).
27 D. Jacobson, B. Musyck, S. Orphanides and C. Webster, The Opening of Ledra Street/Lokmaci Crossing
in April 2008: Reactions from Citizens and Shopkeepers (Oslo: PRIO, 2009).
28 F. Mullen, Ö. Oğuz and P. Kyriacou, The Day After: Commercial opportunities following a solution to the
Cyprus problem (Oslo: PRIO, 2008)
29 Ö. Oğuz Çilsal, P. Kyriacou and F. Mullen, The day after III: the Cyprus peace dividend for Turkey and
Greece (Oslo: PRIO, 2010).
30 N. Trimikliniotis, Free Movement of Workers in Cyprus and the EU (Oslo: PRIO, 2010)
31 Y. Sureç and U. Akifler, ΥThe Turkish Cypriot Competitiveness Report 2008-2009Φ (Turkish Cypriot
Chamber of Commerce, 2010).

26

68

assumptions. The first assumption is that the effective boycott of the other side,
notably by GCs refusing to spend money in the north or on northern Cypriot or
Turkish products, is holding the north back. The northern Cypriot economy is
characterised by market inefficiency due to high production costs and the inability to
trade legitimately.32 However, its isolation can be exaggerated. As one interviewee
pointed out, international franchises penetrate northern Cyprus via Turkey,33 and
the existence of a number of franchises and international brands in the north are
illustrative of the interconnection between the northern Cypriot and Turkish
economies. Indeed northern CyprusΦs unrecognised and liminal status has meant
that it is perforce integrated into the Turkish economy,34 while the north is actively
expanding its networks separate from any political solution. In January 2012, for
example, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation confirmed that it would
encourage its members to cooperate with northern Cyprus Υto overcome unfair
isolations imposed on the TRNC.Φ35 The fact that the Turkish economy itself is doing
well at a time of global uncertainty questions the view that future prosperity for the
north must necessarily rely on the RoC or even the EU.
The second assumption, that a lack of extensive trade across the Green Line denies
the RoC a key economic opportunity, tends to overlook the primary impact of
economic globalisation. While some GCs can envisage greater opportunity through
access to northern Cypriot and perhaps Turkish markets, the potential significance
of cross-line trade is diminished with the RoCΦs increasing economic integration into
European, regional and global currents. For example and beyond EU trade and
relations, Russia has recently agreed to lend the RoC €2.5 billion and Russians are
the source of a quarter of all bank deposits and a third of foreign investment.36

32 ibid, p. 2.
33 Interview by M.K. Flynn, Sept. 2010.
34 Interview by M.K. Flynn, Sept. 2010.

35 ΥIslamic conference issues final declaration in IndonesiaΦ

http://www.worldbulletin.net/?aType=haber&ArticleID=85131 (accessed 7 Feb 2012 by T. King)
36 L. Harding, ΥRussian expat invasion of Cyprus also has sinister overtonesΦ, The Guardian, 26 January
2012.
http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jan/26/cyprus-russian-invasion?INTCMP=SRCH
(accessed by T. King, 6 February 2012).

69

Meanwhile, many RoC households benefit from the low cost labour of domestic
workers, usually women from Asian countries such as the Philippines, Sri Lanka,
Vietnam and Thailand. An estimated 120,000 Π 160,000 migrants live in the RoC,37
which maintains a non-Schengen immigration regime and has relatively lenient
conditions for residency permits. Indeed, within the EU the RoC in 2009 had “the
highest relative number of permits issued [to non-EU nationals]Ι. (320 for every 1000
residents).Υ38
Meanwhile, and despite some recent progress in economic convergence, Cyprus
remains economically divided. Trade across the Green Line is regulated by the
rather narrow scope of the Green Line Regulation (see Section IV) which treats the
line as, effectively, an EU border in terms of what can be imported and under what
conditions.39 Therefore, in addition to attitudinal obstacles, economic activity
between the GCC and TCC faces regulatory impediments as well.
The RoCΦs GDP is €17.3 billion, while per capita GDP stands at €21,600. 40 By way of
contrast, 2009 figures showed that northern CyprusΦs GNP was US$3.5 billion and
per capita GNP stood at US$13,900.41 The difference in economic performance of the
two parts of Cyprus has much to do with the TCCΦs lower economic activity rate
due, in large part, to its difficulty in accessing international markets and its overreliance on direct support from Turkey. Economic recession hit the GCC in 2009,
sharply reducing living standards as well as reducing employment opportunities
south of the Green Line for TCs. North of the Green Line, economic contraction
began in 2008 and turned into a deeper recession in 2009. It is against this economic
background that our project took place.

N. Triminikliniotis, ΥCyprusΦ, Migration, Employment and Labour Market Integration Policies in the
European Union (Brussels: IOM, 2010): 64-67.
38 ΥResident permits issued to non-EU nationals in 2009Φ
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-SF-11-043/EN/KS-SF-11-043-EN.PDF
(accessed 10 Feb. 2012 by M. K.Flynn)
39 See Hatay et al., pp. 27-30.
40 http://www.datosmacro.com/en/gdp/cyprus (accessed by T. King, 11 February 2012)
41 http://www.trnc.eu/eco-generalinfo.html (accessed by T. King, 11 February 2012)

37

70

Perceptions of Economic Problems
In the general household survey, GCC and TCC respondents were asked to specify
their three most important concerns. The two communities clearly saw the ΥCyprus
problemΦ as the major issue, as discussed in Section V above. However, some 25.5%
of the GCC respondents and 11.9% of the TCC sample felt that the economic
situation generally was another key problem, while 7.7% of the GCC and a much
higher proportion (22.1%) of TCC survey participants listed unemployment in the
top three (see Section V, Figure 1). Few respondents indicated infrastructure as a
concern. This important issue for economic progress was, however, identified by
participants at the GCC economics symposium as having major significance.
Particular concern focused on the water shortage problem as well as sewage
infrastructure upgrading, while construction of an island-wide light railway system
was suggested.
Meanwhile GC focus group participants from the political left and centre felt that the
current economic climate made it difficult for small and medium sized enterprises to
compete with larger corporations, further extending the gap between rich and poor.
Interestingly they also perceived fellow GCs to be highly materialistic and
demanding an expensive lifestyle beyond their financial means, thereby generating
long-term adverse effects on the economy. Right-wing participants were more
concerned about declining levels of foreign investment and tourism income.
All GC focus groups expected that, in the future, Cyprus will face rapid price
increases, wage cuts, higher unemployment (especially among the young) and
higher taxation, all of which will undermine their standard of living. They were fully
aware of the economic malaise currently affecting key parts of the eurozone; as one
respondent put it: Υif we donΦt act immediately, we will face similar economic
problems with GreeceΦ(18-45, RW). There was also a strong perception that economic
problems facing Cyprus had close links with immigration. The economic burden
associated with immigration revolved around the perceived demand immigrants

71

place on public resources and their impact on Cypriot unemployment as a source of
cheap labour. Furthermore, some GC discussants felt that the sending remittances
home by non-European workers represented further loss for the RoC.
Participants in the TC focus groups, while agreeing with the main problems
identified by GC participants, also expressed a wider range of economic concerns.
This may be related to a factor inferred from the data collection for the general
household survey. As already noted, the GCC sample was considerably older than
the TCC one. This suggests that younger people from the TCC are more likely to be
at home during the day and hence infers both a lower level of employment and
economic activity in the north. Furthermore, the TC focus groups were undoubtedly
influenced by the furore over an economic stability package announced in early 2011
for northern Cyprus. This was criticised for neglecting social welfare, education and
health issues while focusing principally on economic policy changes such as
privatization, public spending cuts and higher taxes.
Personal Economic Circumstances
Respondents to the general household survey were asked whether their householdΦs
economic situation, compared to a year earlier, had improved, deteriorated or
remained the same. There was a remarkable difference here between the two parts of
the island. Hardly any GCC respondents (1.8%) had experienced improvement while
some 60.3% felt that it had deteriorated. The position appears less extreme in the
north, perhaps counter-intuitively given the poorer state of the TCC economy
overall.

For the TCC over one-fifth of respondents (22.2%) felt their economic

situation had improved while about only one-quarter (25.7%) felt it had deteriorated.
(Figure 1). Within the TCC sample, TC and TO respondents reported about the same
proportion with an improved economic situation (22.5% and 20.0% respectively).
However, TO respondents had experienced more extensive deterioration in their
personal economic circumstances (35.7% compared with 24.6% for TCs).

72

Survey respondents were further asked whether they were able to save some of their
monthly household income. Less than one fifth (19.8%) of the GCC respondents felt
able to do so with over 78% finding saving impossible. TCC respondents, on the
other hand, revealed a much greater propensity to save with over 41% found saving
to be possible while only 56.8% were not able to (Figure 2). Further analysis of the
data showed a clear difference between TCs and TOs on this issue; half of TCs could
save whereas almost two-thirds of TO respondents could not.
But the most striking aspect of our economic data concerned a range of comparative
personal and household indicators. It is a common belief, especially in the GCC, that
the north is backward and poor, although a lack of public expenditure (and
consequent public shabbiness) is not the same as actual poverty. Indeed we found
that the TCC self-reported a higher savings rate, more access to ready capital and
more access to property that could be sold when compared with the GCC sample.
This is important for two reasons. First, it strongly suggests that the north is not
impoverished and lack of capital is not a pressing problem. Second, it debunks the
GCC notion that the north is necessarily poor, and suggests that GCC thinking about
the TCCΦs economic potential may be outdated.
This, in turn, suggests that a critical reconsideration is needed regarding a common
assumption that the TCC will automatically be in the position of the supplicant to
the GCC if the Cypriot economies are integrated. As one TC source commented, GCs
consider themselves as the gatekeepers to prosperity and economic opportunity. The
economic data collected is also significant because it points to a possible overestimation of problems northern Cyprus would face in the event of a solution;
indeed some TC interviewees strongly believed that growing capital investment in
northern Cyprus could compete with the RoC in the key tourism industry if a
settlement did not transpire.42

42 Interviews for this paragraph by M.K. Flynn, Sept. 2010.

73

Access to capital for ordinary citizens is essential in almost any economy, whether it
be for consumption or investment purposes. With this in mind, the general
household survey asked respondents, first, how easily they could acquire €2,000 of
emergency capital. A clear difference was observed here between the two
communities. While 43.2% of GCC respondents would find it either impossible or
very difficult and 35% easy or relatively easy, TCC respondents indicated that only
18% would find it impossible or very difficult and 68% easy or relatively easy
(Figure 3). Closer analysis of the data indicated that it was especially TCs and not
TOs who had greater access to this emergency finance.
Respondents were further asked Υdoes your family own property that it can sell to
raise money if it needed to?Φ Just over one third (37.2%) of GCC respondents felt this
was possible while 62.8% did not. Again, TCC respondents appeared better placed
with over two-thirds stating that this was possible and only 31.9% stating it was not
(Figure 4). Closer consideration of the TCC data again revealed TCs were especially
advantaged with just under three-quarters reporting they could sell property
compared with just under half of the TOs.
Survey participants were also asked how easy it would be for them as individuals to
obtain a loan from a bank for €10,000 and €40,000 respectively. For GCC
respondents, 53.2% said they would find it extremely difficult or impossible to
borrow €10,000 and almost three-quarters (74.3%) would be unable to borrow
€40,000. About one quarter (24.3%) would find €10,000 relatively easy to borrow and
only about one in ten (9.9%) could borrow €40,000. Again, responses from TCC
participants suggested better access to capital. 34% would find €10,000 relatively
easy to borrow while some 15.7% could borrow €40,000. Significantly fewer TCC
(40.2%) than GCC respondents would find it almost impossible to borrow €10,000
although the proportion who would find it almost impossible to borrow €40,000
(73.7%) was much the same as for the GCC (Figures 5 and 6).

74

Interestingly the relationship between age of respondents and access to credit
appeared to matter most for GCC respondents. The oldest group (56+), for example,
found a €40,000 loan harder to acquire (75.5%) compared with those in the 18 to 35
and 36 to 55 age groups (50.3% and 53.7% respectively). However, in the TCC there
was no significant difference across age groups in accessing loans. Overall, the
surprising find here is that capital availability in the north may be more substantial
than previously realised, and therefore offers greater economic potential for
investment in the future than is commonly recognised.
Economic Management and Business Relationships
Respondents to the general household survey were furthermore asked whether
those responsible for the economy in the GCC and TCC cared about the interests of
ordinary people. Over half (55.8%) of GCC respondents answered in the negative
compared with 44.1% from the TCC (Figure 7). The survey also asked whether there
were institutional safeguards of their economic interests. Some 47.4% of GCC and
44.8% of TCC respondents felt that there were no such institutional safeguards
(Figure 8).
Additional questioning concerned views about adoption of the euro. For the RoC,
this happened in 2008; for northern Cyprus the issue remains a distant prospect.
Interestingly, there were some very different responses here. GCC respondents were
almost equally divided on the issue with 35% of respondents stating it had been
entirely or quite a bad thing for the RoC economy and 38.5% believing it had been
entirely or quite good. On the TCC side, however, asked what the effect would be if
the euro were to be adopted in the north, only 17% felt it would be a bad thing while
almost 47% stated that it would be a good thing (Figure 9).43

43

We emphasise here, however, that the survey results predate the current eurozone crisis, so
opinions may very well have changed on this particular point.

75

As already noted in Section V, survey respondents from both sides are wary of
relationships that could put them at a disadvantage, such as having a boss from the
other community. They are also very resistant Π especially in the GCC Π to doing
anything that could support the other sideΦs economy, and this is linked to the wider
issue of recognition and legitimacy. But participants in the focus groups appeared
more open to changing employment relationships. The left-wing and centre GC
participants, for example, stated a willingness to maintain personal and professional
relationships with people from the other community as based on mutual respect and
understanding. As importantly, they expressed a willingness to support
comprehensive access by TCs to all sectors of employment, whether public or
private, and on an equal footing with GCs. While TC focus groups also found that
individuals were willing to engage with the GCC, some expressed concern. Others
argued that they would be more willing to do so only after a solution, while at
present some participants also resisted greater interaction because they found GCs
Υpatronising ... I donΦt like their attitudeΦ (TC 35+ Left).
Overall, however, findings have not indicated that a process of moving towards a
single economic system for the island will be straightforward. Survey responses
suggest deep concern in both parts of Cyprus about the possibility of future
economic interaction in any form ranging from the simplest of routine economic
transactions to more complex personal relationships, like working with colleagues
and bosses from the other community. Earlier in this report, the issue of a lack of
trust between the two communities was discussed and this clearly remains an
important barrier to progress as well from the economic perspective.
Economic Activity and the Crossing Points
The crossing point survey, as opposed to the general household polling, was
designed to identify patterns of economic activity for those actually crossing from
one side to the other. The frequency (or not) of crossing points was already
addressed in Section V. Crossing point survey respondents were asked to select from

76

a range of possible activities they might undertake on a visit to the other side and the
results are noteworthy. Of those travelling from the RoC, over three-quarters (76.6%)
crossed the line to visit places of interest or worship or their familyΦs place of origin.
In other words, most visits by GCs would seem to involve no necessary economic
activity. Only 11.5% of this sample shopped or used restaurants/cafes compared
with just over 38% of those crossing from northern Cyprus into the RoC (Figure 10).
TCs were also far more likely to spend money when crossing than Greek Cypriots
(Figure 11).
Disaggregating the crossing point data by profession also produced interesting
findings. For those crossing from the RoC the only really significant group in terms
of economic activity on the other side were unskilled labourers, manual workers and
domestic workers of whom 57.3% visited shops, restaurants and cafes. The next
highest was the company owner group (33.3%) and then self-employed professionals
(15.4%). The picture for those crossing from the north into the RoC, however, was
quite different by profession. Those having the greatest impact through economic
activities were: students and drafted soldiers (56.2%); non-desk job service sector
employees (50%); middle managers (50.7%) and desk job/clerical employees (46.9%).
Thus it is clear that the principal rationale for those crossing from the RoC is
primarily to undertake activities with little economic impact while those crossing the
other way more often undertake significant economic activities.44
Crossing point survey respondents were also asked how much money they spent on
their last visit. Of those coming from the RoC who spent money on the other side
(669 responses), the largest number (239) spent between €20 and €50 with a further
119 spending between €50 and €100. For those making the crossing from the north
who spent money (691 responses), 238 spent between €20 and €50 while 125 spent
between €50 and €100 (Figure 12). Therefore, more money is spent by people
crossing from the north than vice versa. While expenditure estimates here are slightly
44

This confirms findings by Hatay et al., and Jacobson et al.

77

lower than reported in other surveys,45 it remains the case that visitors from the
north spend significantly more than those from the RoC on visits across the Green
Line.
In terms of what money was spent on, visitors from the RoC to the north spent
mainly on clothing and accessories (76.2%), and household goods and foodstuffs
(16.3%). In terms of services purchased, some 59.4% spent money in cafes, bars and
clubs while significant expenditure was also made in restaurants (21.6%) and casinos
(16.5%). For those crossing from the north, 56.6% purchased clothes and accessories,
14.5% household goods and foodstuffs, 10.8% alcohol and tobacco, and 5.1%
cosmetics. With regards to services, 45.1% spent money in cafes, bars and clubs,
47.2% in restaurants, and 5% on healthcare (Figures 13 and 14).
However and as already noted in the general household survey, a significant
proportion of those crossing, especially GCs crossing into the north, are reluctant to
spend money on the other side for political and ethical reasons. The pattern was
largely replicated in the crossing point survey. Of those from the RoC who had not
spent money, three quarters (74.7%) stated that the need to spend money had simply
not arisen. However, almost two in five (18.5%) said that they did not wish to
support the economy of northern Cyprus, while only 2.4% said this was because
they did not trust the quality of the other sideΦs products. For those crossing from
the north into the RoC who had not spent money, almost four in five (79.3%) stated
that the issue simply had not arisen yet. However, 15.8% admitted that it was
because they did not wish to support the economy of the other side while a further
4.9% felt that prices were too high (Figure 15).

45 Peace Economics Consortium, ΥEconomic Interdependence in CyprusΦ (Nicosia: Cyprus Chamber of

Commerce & Industry and Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce, 2011).

78

Conclusion
The profile of Cyprus based upon these survey results and other project data
suggests that, while some economic interaction has been stimulated as a result of the
opening of more crossing points, widespread attitudinal obstacles remain to greater
economic interaction, aside from the issue of Green Line regulations. There is also a
notable degree of cynicism regarding the ability and will of politicians to look after
peopleΦs economic wellbeing (Figure 16). However, focus group discussants and
contributors to the economics symposia suggested that reaching a satisfactory
settlement to the Cyprus problem was actually in the economic interests of both
communities, with the potential to both generate increased cross-border trading and
create significant economies of scale with associated cost savings.46 In turn this
would likely make Cyprus overall more globally competitive; as one interviewee
noted,47 Cyprus could then profit from its important ΥhubΦ location as a central point
between markets in the EU, North Africa and the Middle East. GCC symposium
participants further observed that the best strategy for the future might be to focus
more on maximising this economic potential and less on the ΥCyprus problemΦ itself.
There is a school of thought arguing that increasing economic activity across the
Green Line might blur it almost by stealth.48 While this may be a hopeful approach,
it is also inconsistent with the very real hurdle created by the special regime around
Green Line Regulation as implemented by the EU. Obstacles presented by the
Regulation furthermore chime with social and political attitudes as shown through
our polling data. Moreover, our data indicates that the types of economic activity
conducted by visitors crossing the Green Line are not the same on each side with
those crossing often motivated by very different reasons. Those coming from the
north to the RoC tend to shop, use public services, enjoy cafes and restaurants as
well as work, and hence spend considerable amounts. Conversely, visitors from the

46

See also Mullen et al.

47 Interview by T. King, February 2011.
48 See Peace Economics Consortium.

79

RoC more often cross north to visit areas of origin or places of interest or worship.
This generates much lower levels of spending, often accompanied by a high level of
grievance linked to visiting areas from which they or their families were displaced.
Meanwhile a large proportion of both TCs and GCs do not cross at all or have only
done so once. This is linked to a marked reluctance by significant numbers of GCs
and TCs to do anything that could support the economy of the other side. Therefore,
economic transactions remain overwhelmingly at the ad hoc micro-level, while
formal, large-scale economic interaction is virtually non-existent. The kind of
personal economic activity we have observed is symptomatic of low levels of societal
trust on both sides. Developing economic policy approaches that could support
broader moves towards reconciliation for Cyprus, then, have to confront these
issues. Focused financial support for cross-border small and medium-sized
enterprise initiatives, possibly involving simultaneous infrastructure developments
to improve communications and transport, could be considered for example. Trade
fairs, designed to encourage the inflow of foreign capital, could also encourage
greater trust and bi-communal interaction, if they are genuinely open to both sides
and on equal terms.49 Ongoing engagement with and between the two Chambers of
Commerce should continue and be supported. But at the same time, an in-depth
reconsideration of the relative economic strengths and weaknesses Π based
specifically on the contemporary situation for both communities - is also needed, as
existing preconceptions may no longer hold true.
However, full scale change in economic relations between the two communities
depends on political movement and substantial transformation of the rules of
engagement across the Green Line. Whatever economic adjustments can be brought
about are very limited without discernible political progress in resolving the Cyprus
problem and - crucially Π creating a sympathetic regulatory framework. Economics

49 See also Hatay et al., pp. 73-78

80

can support a process of change but cannot work in isolation from other factors, such
as questions of social trust within and between the two communities.

81

Figure 1 (General Household Survey - GHS)
Compared to a year ago, would you say your household’s economic situation has
improved, deteriorated or remained the same?
GCC

TCC

82

Figure 2 (GHS)
Do you save some of your monthly household income in a savings account?
GCC

TCC

83

Figure 3 (GHS)
On a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means ‘impossible’ and 5 means ‘very easy’, how
easy or hard would it be for you personally to cover some emergency expenses up
to €2000?
GCC

TCC

84

Figure 4 (GHS)
Does your family own property that it can sell to raise money if it needed to?
GCC

TCC

85

Figure 5 (GHS)
On a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means ‘impossible’ and 5 means ‘very easy’, how
easy or hard would it be for you personally to get a loan from a bank for €10,000?
GCC

TCC

86

Figure 6 (GHS)
On a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means ‘impossible’ and 5 means ‘very easy’, how
easy or hard would it be for you personally to get a loan from a bank for €40,000
GCC

TCC

87

Figure 7 (GHS)
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “I totally disagree” and 5 means “I totally
agree” to what extent do you agree that those responsible for the economy in the
GCC/ TCC care about the interests of the common people?
GCC

TCC

88

Figure 8 (GHS)
On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means ‘I totally disagree’ and 5 means ‘I totally agree’
to what extent do you agree that there are institutions that safeguard my economic
interests?
GCC

TCC

89

Figure 9 (GHS)
Do you consider Cyprus’ adoption of the euro as the national currency is…
GCC

Would you consider the adoption of the euro as the national currency as…
TCC

90

Figure 10 (Crossing Point Survey - CPS)
Which of the following activities do you usually engage in when you visit the
other side?
GCC

TCC

91

Figure 11 (GHS)
Do you usually spend money when you visit the other side?
GCC

TCC

92

Figure 12 (CPS)
Did you spend money on the other side today, and if yes, how much?
GCC

TCC

93

Figure 13 (CPS)
What goods did your purchase on the other side?
GCC

TCC

94

Figure 14 (CPS)
What services did you purchase on the other side?
GCC

TCC

95

Figure 15 (CPS)
Are there some specific reasons for which you don’t spend money on the other
side?
GCC

TCC

96

Figure 16 (GHS)
Those responsible for the economy in the GCC/ TCC care about the interests of
the common people.
GCC

TCC

97

VII. Project Delivery (M.K. Flynn)
This project was based on a combination of research, dialogue and dissemination
(see Section III) with aspects of project delivery therefore relevant to consider as part
of these summary findings. In particular what specific challenges were encountered
in realizing the full intent of the project? This is in addition to assuming the routine
challenges of fieldwork in different cultural, social, political and linguistic
environments requiring the development of new contacts, relationships and sources
of information. Furthermore the team had always expected that there would be some
political objections to the project; as Ergün Olgun, former undersecretary to the
presidency of northern Cyprus and well known for his uncompromising views,
critically observed: ΥThe EU and the international community are obsessed with a
federal model for reconciliation and peace economics in Cyprus.Φ (email, 16
September 2009).

But beyond these noted issues, the main challenges we

encountered as a project team can be briefly summarized under two related
headings: project and programme relevance; and programme coordination.
Project and Programme Relevance
The question of relevance has already been flagged near the end of Section III above.
For example, we should evaluate if project methodology was valid and pertinent
throughout, especially considering the lengthy timeframe of more than three and a
half years from inception to conclusion. And indeed the research methodology
(surveys, focus groups and interviews) remained robust, and dissemination
(delivery of preliminary and summary findings) has been unproblematic. To a great
extent these successes were due to the high calibre of Cypriot service delivery on
both sides of the Green Line. This included services provided by survey
organizations, translators, printers and caterers, as well as for venue hire and events
support. All payments were transparently accounted for in full by receipts and
invoices. Individuals working at Cypriot NGOs and universities were relatively easy
to contact for interview, as were staff at a number of foreign missions and those

98

working for internationally funded organizations and projects. However, politicians
and policy-makers were less available, with the notable exception of the Republican
Turkish Party (CTP)50 in northern Cyprus.
However, the assumption of broad interest on the part of Cypriots in the dialogue
aspect of the project, regarding both its reconciliation and economic themes, was
misplaced. Most telling was the low turn-out at the four stakeholder symposia,
although subsequent attendance at the collaborative bi-communal event was
comparatively better. Due to different communal perspectives and concerns (as
apparent in the survey data), separate GCC and TCC symposia were scheduled for
each of the reconciliation and economic themes. These were scheduled at different
venues, days and times determined in consultation with a Cypriot event organiser
with bi-communal links, and all venues were chosen in part due to their central
locations. Three symposia took place in Nicosia and one in Limassol. Invitations Π
translated into Turkish or Greek as appropriate for each community - were sent to
both targeted individuals and organizations, as well as circulated more generally.
Cypriots working in event support followed up a number of invitations with phone
calls in the run up to specific symposia.
Yet turnout at each event was sparse despite the different days, times, venues, cities
and themes. Furthermore some Cypriots who had indicated their intent to attend
simply did not show up. Follow-up discussion with a number of Cypriots who work
with or organize similar functions was enlightening as they said that low attendance
at such events was often a known problem. One contact observed that their
organization estimated that only 2-5% of invitees would attend events; personnel
working with a few other NGOs concurred. The main reason given was that many
people had lost interest in attending events intended to complement a peace process
because the Cyprus talks had dragged on for so long without result. Interestingly, a
few Cypriots who did not attend asked instead to be provided with symposia

50 The CTP is a social democratic party in favour of the reunification of Cyprus.

99

materials (i.e. project research in progress). However, low turnout across all the
symposia does suggest that there was little interest in the dialogue element of the
project, and that the situation on the ground, in fact, lacks a sense of urgency with
regards to the project topics.
Reflecting on project relevance also means considering the value of the EUΦs Cypriot
Civil Society in Action programme51 which is intended, for example, to foster
dialogue. Furthermore, project themes that the EuropeAid programme encompasses,
such as trust, cooperation, reconciliation and civil society, are also funded from other
sources, notably UNDP-ACT52 and PRIO53 but also, for example, the EEA54, Council
of Europe and Freidrich Ebert Stiftung.55 Additionally there is another USAIDfunded programme, CyPEG, focusing on economic issues. Revealingly, a good
number of NGO and academic staff said that sometimes the sheer number of similar
projects and events, usually taking place in Nicosia, meant that attending more than
a few was difficult without detracting from oneΦs own work, social and family
commitments.
As one Cypriot conjectured about the low symposia participation: ΥIt is almost
always the usual suspects who participate and they cannot attend all the
events.... There were quite a few events going on in May and June. This is not only
my view but the view of all those involved in bi-communal workΦ (email, 12 August
2011). Understandably, event attendance can then tend towards those aligned with
oneΦs own organization or that of oneΦs friends, family or immediate colleagues, thus
fragmenting a donor constituency with supposedly common interests. The
segmented character of this constituency, what many in Cyprus refer to as the Υusual
suspectsΦ, must certainly limit the impact and outreach of various funded activities.

51 By December 2010 the Cypriot Civil Society in Action programme had awarded up to €5.4 million

to over forty projects.
52 Co-funded by the UNDP and USAID
53 The Cyprus office of the Peace Research Institute Oslo, Norway
54 European Economic Area grants are funded by Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.
55 A non-profit political foundation affiliated with the German social democrats.

100

In short, an element of project fatigue and overload may detract from significant
interest in individual projects and events. This situation is not peculiar to Cyprus
and is instead often found in places where foreign assistance is funded by multiple,
crosscutting donors.
Programme Coordination
The last point above raises questions regarding programme coordination, at least
insofar as it impacted on this project. The most salient issue here is that the EUΦs
Civil Society Support Team, which provided practical assistance to grantees of the
Cypriot Civil Society in Action Programme, closed permanently in February 2011.
This was four months prior to the projectΦs first symposium, and coincides with
when the project team had planned to make use of its assistance. Thereafter there
was no apparent coordination at the programme level to, for example, encourage
project managers in sharing experience of best practice or discussing challenges to
work in progress. Nor was there any apparent coordination between the Cypriot
Civil Society in Action Programme and like projects funded by other donors, as
already inferred above.
Without some element of coordination, or at least technical knowledge sharing
between projects, the EU is not making best use of its EuropeAid money as an
investment in Cyprus. Indeed, there was a number of other projects undertaking
work complementary to this one on reconciliation and peace economics, and an
element of facilitated dialogue or programmatic cooperation may well have been
mutually beneficial. These other Cypriot Civil Society in Action projects could have
included, for example:



Cyprus Six Years after the Referenda: Re-Unification or Two-State Solution (Arnold
Bergstraesser Institut, Germany)
Developing Trust and Cooperation Research to Improve Civil Society Practice
(INTRAC, UK)

101








Establishing a Think Tank on Migration, Identity and Rights Studies (Centre for
Migration, Identity and Rights Studies)
Minority Rights: A Contribution to the Cyprus Problem (Minority Rights Group
International, UK)
Right to Access Information Point (Cyprus EU Association)
Towards Trust Building: Reconciliation through a Common Purpose (Turkish
Economic and Social Studies Foundation, Turkey)
Truth-seeking and Trust-Building in Cyprus (International Centre for Transitional
Justice, USA)

Additionally, the simple provision of an EU-supported website for posting various
projectsΦ findings and other disseminated materials could have been helpful. This
would also have promoted the overall public profile and impact of the Cypriot Civil
Society in Action programme

102

VIII. Concluding Comments
The question of uniting Cyprus has often hinged on the hopeful premise that
increased social and economic interaction will encourage the GCC and TCC to
reconcile their differences and develop common interests. Preliminary project
findings do not necessarily support this view. The data shows that neither
community agrees on what the Cyprus problem actually is, and there is widespread
disagreement and suspicion about not only the shape of a post-solution Cyprus, but
also the measures that could be taken to get there. There is a notable and pervasive
deficit of social trust between the two, manifested in the large number of ways in
which mistrust is expressed. Indeed, enhanced opportunity for contact has not
necessarily improved trust levels but may have had Π according to survey
respondents - the opposite effect. However, the issue of trust between the
communities is not an isolated factor. It should be considered as part of a related
deficit of trust within the two communities and, significantly, of citizens on both
sides regarding their own institutions.
While the Cyprus problem is cited as a primary concern by Cypriots across the
island, in actuality it has little relevance to most peopleΦs daily lives, and so reasons
as to why it should be mutually resolved are ill-defined and nebulous.
Considerations of a beneficial economic future for everyone could be one binding
element, but our data suggests that northern CyprusΦs economy is not in the grim
state that many people, especially in the south, commonly assume. This then begs
the question of just how far the benefits of unification may or may not outweigh
other factors. Economic interests alone do not supersede questions of social and
political trust which must be at the heart of a successfully negotiated settlement in
the future.

103

IX. Project Team (UWE)
Dr. M.K. Flynn is Senior Lecturer in Politics and convenes the University Peace and
Conflict Research Cluster. She took a DPhil in Politics from the University of Oxford
and has worked at universities in Ukraine, Israel and South Africa as well as the UK.
Her expertise includes: ethnicity and conflict; peacebuilding; democratisation;
transitional justice; and the politics of contested history and heritage. Prior to work
in Cyprus she has specialized in work on Northern Ireland, South Africa, Spain and
parts of the former USSR. She serves on the editorial board for the leading academic
journal Ethnic and Racial Studies and is an Honorary University Fellow at the Exeter
Centre for Ethno-Political Studies at the University of Exeter, UK.
Dr. Tony King originally trained as an historian of colonial and post-colonial
societies, and his DPhil (Oxon.) was on political discourse in colonial Zimbabwe.
Before returning to the UK with UWE he worked for the academic and policyadvocacy NGO sector in South Africa. He has subsequently developed expertise on
heritage in post-apartheid South Africa, contested history, democratisation, and
transition societies, and undertook research on the development of Constitution Hill,
Johannesburg. He has authored and co-authored a number of academic articles,
book chapters, reviews and reports.
Prof. (Emeritus) Derek Braddon has expertise in defence, industrial and
international economics and also undertakes research and consultancy about:
stakeholding and corporate governance; the transitional economies of Eastern
Europe; new industrial economics, regional economics and the aerospace industry.
He has been: Director of the Defence Economics Research Group at UWE; Fellow of
the UKΦs Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce;
and Visiting Professor at the European Centre for Peace and Development, United
Nations University, Belgrade, Serbia. His latest publication is the co-authored and edited volume, D. Braddon and K. Hartley, eds., The Handbook on the Economics of
Conflict (Edward Elgar 2011).
Christian Dadomo is a Senior Lecturer in European Law. Prior to this, he was
lecturing at the Institut dΦEtudes Politiques and the Institut des Hautes Etudes
Européennes in Strasbourg (France). He has also been a visiting lecturer at Deakin
University (Melbourne, Australia) and Münster University (Germany). His
particular expertise is in European Union constitutional law, the European internal
market, and environmental and competition law. He has been involved in a number
of programmes on EU-related issues in Cyprus before and after Accession, and in
EU-funded programmes within a number of EU and non-EU countries. Among a
variety of journal articles and conference papers on EU and French law, his main
publications include two textbooks on the French legal system and French
substantive law. He is currently writing a book on the French legal system and law,
and co-writing a textbook on EU law.

104

