Review - Rethinking Peacebuilding
Written by Christina Woolner

This PDF is auto-generated for reference only. As such, it may contain some conversion errors and/or missing information. For all
formal use please refer to the official version on the website, as linked below.

Review - Rethinking Peacebuilding
https://www.e-ir.info/2013/02/05/review-rethinking-peacebuilding/
CHRISTINA WOOLNER, FEB 5 2013

Rethinking Peacebuilding: The quest for just peace in the Middle East and Western Balkans
Edited By: Karin Aggestam and Annika Björkdahl
London and New York: Routledge, 2012

Although the term ‘just peace’ is common in peacebuilding literature, and is frequently invoked as a desired goal of
contemporary peacebuilding activities, there is surprisingly little research focused on what a ‘just peace’ may entail.
Karin Aggestam and Annika Björkdahl’s edited volume Rethinking Peacebuilding: The quest for just peace in the
Middle East and Western Balkans takes up the timely challenge of reframing both peacebuilding theory and practice
to better address questions related to the relationship between peace and justice in contemporary peacebuilding.
This volume takes a highly interdisciplinary approach to address three core challenges: the quest for justice in
contemporary peace processes; the quest for a durable peace; and the quest for effective peacebuilding strategies
(p. 1). This review will highlight some of the main conceptual insights of the volume, pertinent details about individual
chapter contributions, and then assess the strengths and weaknesses of the work as a whole.
‘Just Peace’ as an Outcome and Process: A Conceptual Framework

E-International Relations

ISSN 2053-8626

Page 1/5

Review - Rethinking Peacebuilding
Written by Christina Woolner

Perhaps the most conceptually useful part of the book is Aggestam and Björkdahl’s introduction. Here, the authors
make the helpful distinction between thinking of ‘just peace’ as both an outcome and a process. As an outcome,
research on ‘just peace’ focuses on delineating the characteristics of what makes peace ‘just’ and sustainable. ‘Just’
in this instance is an adjective used to qualify the ethical quality and durability of ‘peace’, which is often measured by
the extent to which a given ‘peace’ responds to underlying causes and perceived injustices that perpetuate conflict
(p. 2). The authors identify four divergent outcomes that are often associated with making peace ‘just’: order (the reestablishment of the rule of law); retribution (punishment of perpetrators, an end to impunity, and accountability);
restoration (a restorative justice approach that focuses on repairing relationships and rebuilding trust); and
distribution (addressing core structural inequalities) (pp. 2-5).
While these different outcomes give us a sense of what a ‘just peace’ may entail, the authors ultimately suggest that
because both ‘peace’ and ‘justice’ are highly contested and value-laden terms, one universal definition of ‘just peace’
can never be found. Rather, we should conceive of ‘just peace’ as a process in which peace is constructed
intersubjectively. The degree to which all parties to a conflict can be meaningfully involved in helping to shape the
quality of the peace to come is thus what makes a peace ‘just’. Strategies for allowing such a peace to emerge
include various forms of negotiation, deliberation, and reconciliation. While not stated outright in the introduction, this
conceptualization of ‘just peace’ (or ‘just peacemaking’ in its verbal form) in turn demands a re-thinking of the liberal
peacebuilding paradigm. This model has tended to impose a standardized blueprint for peace, often overlooking
local agency and understandings of peace. This critique of liberal peacebuilding surfaces more fully in the authors’
conclusion, as well as in a number of individual chapters throughout the book.
Whether conceived as an outcome or a process, Aggestam and Björkdahl note that the quest for ‘just peace’ faces a
range of ethical and practical dilemmas. These include: considering the trade-offs necessary between peacebuilding
and transitional justice; the challenge of timing and/or sequencing peace and justice activities; considering the
relationship between local and international actors; and the evolving nature of European Union (EU) peacebuilding
strategies. Addressing these dilemmas in both theory and practice becomes the focus of the proceeding chapters.
Theorizing Just Peace
Part I of the volume includes 7 chapters that each contain different theoretical reflections on the nature of ‘just
peace’. To begin, Chapter 1 (Bar-Simon-Tav) addresses the challenge of sequencing peace and justice activities,
and explores different ways of balancing the relationship between justice demands and peace that will enable a
durable peace. Ultimately, Bar-Simon-Tav argues that the issue of injustices can be raised during a peace
agreement, but addressing these injustices should not be a pre-condition for a peace agreement to be signed. This
should rather be deferred to the reconciliation phase of a peace process.
In chapter 2, Aggestam further develops a process-oriented approach to studying just peace (first introduced in her
introduction), which focuses on the intersubjective and relational nature of the concept. Aggestam suggests that
paying more attention to the politics of reconciliation and recognition may help us to understand the ‘middle ground’
in which an intersubjective understanding of just peace may be fostered.
Chapter 3 (Herman, Martin-Orgeta, Sriram) presents a more practice-focused analysis of what happens when
peacebuilding activities (specifically, rule of law promotion, DDR and SSR) and transitional justice activities
(prosecutions, commissions or inquiries, vetting, restorative justice, amnesties) overlap. For each peacebuilding
activity, the authors note that there are both contradictions and complementarities with transitional justice activities,
suggesting that trade-offs may be necessary at times, but ‘justice’ and ‘peacebuilding’ activities are not mutually
exclusive, and can complement one another.
Chapters 4 (Richmond) and 5 (Björkdahl) both offer theoretical critiques of the liberal peacebuildling model by
focusing on the relationship between international and local actors. Richmond suggests the need for a ‘fourthgeneration’ of peacebuilding, one in which ‘hybrid’ forms of peace that enable local agency are given space to
develop, and issues of social and distributive justice are given more attention. Similarly, Björkdahl suggests that a
process of ‘localizing’ just peace can occur by allowing for more constructive public deliberations.

E-International Relations

ISSN 2053-8626

Page 2/5

Review - Rethinking Peacebuilding
Written by Christina Woolner

Chapter 6 (Hyde-Price) also offers a critique of the liberal peacebuilding model, though from a realist perspective.
Hyde-Price suggests that instead of aiming towards an overly normative and utopian ‘just peace’, a “praxis-oriented,
problem-solving approach to conflict situations,” which is more realistic about what can be achieved, given the
structure of both international and local systems, is more appropriate (pp. 99-100). Prudence, skepticism and
reciprocity are key to this approach.
Finally, chapter 7 (Österdahl) explores some of the legal intricacies of the concept of jus post bellum, or ‘justice after
war’ as an extension of just war theory, and considers its relationship to jus in bello and jus ad bellum.
Just Peace in Practice
Part II of the book shifts from theory to a focus on the search for just peace in practice, with a particular emphasis on
the Middle East and Western Balkans. The section begins with a novel quantitative study on the relationship
between the inclusion of justice principles in peace agreements and the potential durability of peace (Ch. 8,
Wallensteen, Melander and Hogbladh). While the analysis seems to tentatively suggest that the inclusion of these
principles may lead to a more durable peace (as Melander found in an earlier study), the chapter highlights the need
for more research in this area.
Chapters 9 (Al-Momani and Rennick) and 10 (Persson) focus on some of the challenges of working towards a just
peace in the Middle East. Chapter 9 explores how ‘social justice’ is conceived in an Arab-Islamic context, and how
this relates to EU peacebuilding efforts. Al-Momani and Rennick point out that many of the assumptions about what
constitutes ‘just peace’ in a communitarian Islamic setting (such as redistribution of wealth and social responsibility)
are at odds with the liberal ideals of economic liberalization, individualism and democracy-building that undergird EU
peacebuilding strategies. For a deeper and more lasting peace to emerge, greater attention must thus be paid to
culturally relevant methods of conflict resolution. Chapter 10 examines the political, economic and security roles the
EU is currently playing in Israel-Palestine, and highlights a number of the dilemmas faced in this work. While the EU
has faced challenges, Persson is ultimately optimistic about their contribution to developing a just peace in IsraelPalestine.
Chapters 11 (Kappler) and 12 (Martin-Ortega) turn to an analysis of the quest for just peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina
(BiH). Kappler uses what she calls an “institutional ethnography” and “discourse analysis” approach (p. 169) to
consider how the EU’s vision of peace corresponds with representations of peace on the ground in BiH. Kappler also
finds that the way the EU envisions peace (in a structural, linear and institutional way) contrasts sharply with local
visions of peace (which are much more focused on every-day survival and issues of ethnic justice). Like Al-Momani
and Rennick suggest, Kappler concludes that greater effort needs to be made to contextualize peace efforts, a
conclusion that supports Aggestam and Björkdahl’s call for thinking of ‘just peace’ as an intersubjective process.
Chapter 12 turns to an analysis of the effects of post-war efforts to establish justice in BiH, including the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as hybrid and national courts. Martin-Ortega suggests
that the impact of the courts has been mixed; although a measure of justice has been achieved, and demands for
accountability have increased, a focus on retributive justice has curtailed restorative justice initiatives.
Towards A Transformative and Reflexive Peacebuilding Model
Aggestam and Björkdahl’s conclusion reiterates the idea that ‘just peace’ is a highly contested term, and notes that
while the liberal peacebuilding model has become the de facto norm, the cases in this book highlight that this
approach has led to problematic outcomes. Although the liberal model is increasingly being challenged, few
alternatives have been put forward. The authors thus suggest a number of conclusions about just peace in theory
and practice that they hope will advance the conversation on effective, transformative peacebuilding models.
Theoretically, they highlight again that just peace can be seen as both an outcome and a process, but emphasize
that a process-oriented approach underlines the intersubjective, transformative, and self-sustainable characteristics
of building just peace.
Tying together the many lessons highlighted in part II of the book, Aggestam and Björkdahl suggest a number of key

E-International Relations

ISSN 2053-8626

Page 3/5

Review - Rethinking Peacebuilding
Written by Christina Woolner

ideas that should guide the quest for just peace in practice, which warrant repeating in full: (1) Just peace needs to
be grounded in an ethical and reflexive framework;(2) Building peace is a relational practice, and reconciliation is
therefore key; (3) International actors should focus on facilitation rather than imposing a universal blueprint; (4)
Peacebuilding is not an apolitical process, therefore questions of power and empowerment need to be better
accounted for; (5) While opinions diverge on the sequencing of peace and justice activities, the authors suggest they
need to be pursued simultaneously and be viewed as complementary
Assessment: Strengths, Weaknesses, and Questions for Future Research
Taken as a whole, this volume represents a timely and innovative contribution to the study of effective peacebuilding
strategies, which fills a particular gap in the literature by focusing on the relationship between justice and peace. The
editors and various contributors consider both definitions of ‘peace’ and ‘justice’ and the relationship between them
in nuanced, diverse, and enlightening ways that also serve to critique some of the problematic elements of the liberal
peacebuilding model. The division of the book into ‘theory’ and ‘practice’ sections gives it an accessible and logical
progression.
The interdisciplinary nature of the volume—which includes everything from philosophical reflections and IR theory to
quantitative studies, ethnography and discourse analysis—is also a great strength, and allows the reader a diversity
of entry-points into thinking about ‘just peace’. Significantly, the various contributors do not speak with one voice on
the topic; although various contributions vary in their ability to directly address the issue of ‘just peace’, this diversity
of opinions serves to highlight that ‘just peace’ is a highly contested term.
On a theoretical level, the authors’ overall emphasis on a process-oriented approach to ‘just peace’, and the
importance of developing just peace intersubjectively also sets this book apart from other books on ‘just peace’, most
of which are more concerned with establishing recipes for what a ‘just peace’ may look like. Aggestam and Björkdahl
do put forward a number of concrete suggestions to guide the quest for a just peace, but are still able resist the
temptation to define. Instead, they wisely conclude, “the notion of just peace is not easily captured and requires
reflection rather than affirmation” (p. 206).
While the strengths of this book far outweigh its weaknesses, the book contains a number of tensions and unresolved
issues. Although the book clearly seeks to problematize elements of the liberal peacebuilding model, many of the
chapters continue to use the term ‘peacebuilding’ in a de facto manner to refer to traditional liberal peacebuilding
practices (such as rule of law promotion, security sector reform, economic liberalization, etc) that precludes
consideration of other types of peacebuilding activities. The focus on state-centric EU peacebuilding efforts furthers
this tendency. While this approach perhaps represents the general state of the field, this volume could have been
strengthened by a fuller consideration of different types of peacebuilding activities.
One way to address the above concern would be to expand the types of case studies to include a broader range of
examples. While the focus on Israel-Palestine and BiH is interesting, it seems to be rooted in the authors’ own
research backgrounds rather than any other rationale, and the amount of space in the book devoted to actually
exploring these cases (two chapters each) does not seem to warrant their inclusion in the title of the book. Instead of
focusing on only EU activities in these two cases, the volume would have been strengthened by including more
examples of bottom-up peacebuilding activities from countries at different stages in the post-war
rebuilding/reconciliation process. Some consideration of cases where ‘hybrid’, intersubjective and transformative
forms of peacebuilding have taken root would have been especially helpful.
In addition to conceiving of just peace as an intersubjective process, another interesting theoretical insight put
forward by the authors is the idea that ‘just peace’ is morally superior to negative peace, but superseded by positive
peace. While the book makes clear the differences between negative peace and just peace, the qualitative
differences between just peace and positive peace are not really explored. The idea of a continuum of negative-justpositive peace, and how it relates to just peace as an intersubjective process, holds interesting potential, and could
serve as a starting point for future work on this subject.

E-International Relations

ISSN 2053-8626

Page 4/5

Review - Rethinking Peacebuilding
Written by Christina Woolner

This book will be of interest to a wide range of students, scholars and practitioners interested in better understanding
the notion of ‘just peace’. The particulars of the case studies will speak most clearly to scholars and practitioners
concerned with Israel-Palestine and Bosnia-Herzegovina, especially those working from within an EU context.
However, the theoretical contributions made in the introduction and part I of the volume, and the lessons gleaned
from part II, have much broader applicability. This book is therefore important reading for anyone concerned with
better understanding the relationship between peace and justice, and the changing nature of contemporary
peacebuilding.
—
Christina Woolner is currently Fellow and Lecturer at the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, University of
Hargeisa (Somaliland), and regularly works as an instructor in the Global Studies Department at Wilfrid Laurier
University (Waterloo, Canada). She holds a B.A. in Global Studies and Religion & Culture from Wilfrid Laurier
University, and an M.A. in International Peace Studies from the Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at the
University of Notre Dame.

About the author:
Christina Woolner is currently Fellow and Lecturer at the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, University of
Hargeisa (Somaliland), and regularly works as an instructor in the Global Studies Department at Wilfrid Laurier
University (Waterloo, Canada). She holds a B.A. in Global Studies and Religion & Culture from Wilfrid Laurier
University, and an M.A. in International Peace Studies from the Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at the
University of Notre Dame.

E-International Relations

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

ISSN 2053-8626

Page 5/5

