4
The shifting sands of relational peace
in Cyprus
Jason Klocek

On March 31, 2004, Kofi Annan made an impassioned plea for local Cypriot
leaders to support impending referenda to end three decades of division on
the island. He framed the importance of these plebiscites in no uncertain
terms: “Let me be clear. The choice is not between this settlement plan and
some other magical or mythical solution. In reality, at this stage, the choice
is between this settlement and no settlement” (Annan 2004). The SecretaryGeneral’s words proved to be hauntingly accurate. While a majority of the
Turkish Cypriot population voted in favor of a federation of two states,
more than three-quarters of Greek Cypriots cast their ballots in opposition.
And in the decade and a half since the failed 2004 reunification plan, no
fewer than four additional rounds of peace talks have been attempted and
abandoned.1 Today, the divided island remains the site of Europe’s longest
unresolved political dispute and an archetype of intractable conflict (Heraclides
2011).2 The half-century of political stalemate in Cyprus raises challenging
questions for peace scholars and practitioners alike.3 Why has it been so
difficult to reunify the island? Why have top-down negotiations such as
the Annan Plan, as well as more recent bottom-up approaches, proved
equally ineffective? What might a permanent settlement even look like at this
point?
There is, of course, no shortage of answers to such questions. Politicians,
policy analysts, peacemakers, and conflict scholars have all weighed in over
the years. This diverse set of actors has advanced varied and inventive plans
of action, but most share a common perspective. Taking a negative peace
framework as their starting point, they stress that the island has been free
of extended periods of armed conflict since the 1974 ceasefire that divided
Cyprus and express a strong desire not to undermine the current status quo.
Policy suggestions, in turn, involve some variation of security guarantees
and a plan for shared governance between the Greek and Turkish Cypriot
communities. The primary concern of these plans is to avoid a return to
intercommunal violence. They overwhelmingly frame the Greek and Turkish

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

103

Cypriot communities as unitary and static actors and focus more on political
than societal tensions between the two groups. They often overlook cooperative initiatives that have emerged between the two communities in recent
years, and they rarely consider variation within either society.
This chapter applies a relational view of peace as an alternative way of
understanding the Cyprus problem (Söderström et al. 2021; Jarstad et al.,
this volume, Introduction). It traces variation in each of the framework’s
components (i.e., behavioral interactions, subjective attitudes, and ideas of
the relationship) since 1960. A key value added by this perspective is that
it shifts our attention to a more complex set of interactions than is captured
by past analyses. Rather than viewing Greek and Turkish Cypriots as
homogeneous and fixed groups, this framework draws attention to a varied
set of cooperative and competitive relationships within and between the
two communities.
This chapter pays particular attention to two sets of dyads at the elite
level: those between leaders in the Greek Cypriot community and those
between Greek and Turkish Cypriot officials. Understanding the behavior,
attitudes, and ideas of Greek Cypriot elites is especially important for securing
a lasting peace on the island given the Greek Cypriot community has been
the primary veto player in recent years. The opening anecdote of this chapter
underscores how support for the 2004 Annan Plan was weakest within that
community. A more recent public opinion poll suggests that attitudes toward
a federation have not shifted in over a decade (Psaltis et al. 2017: 72–75).
Moreover, as the majority population with de jure sovereignty over the
island, Greek Cypriots have fewer incentives than their counterparts to
reach a resolution in the short term.
The analysis draws on historical accounts, public opinion data, policy
reports, English-language news material, and informal conversations with
residents of Nicosia during two months of fieldwork in 2015. These data
are complemented by secondary sources where appropriate. My analysis is
also informed by eight months of research at The National Archives of the
United Kingdom and the Cyprus State Archives.4 This approach of combining
multiple data collection methods – known as between-method triangulation
– provides several advantages (Denzin 2012, 1970; see also Tarrow 2010:
108–110). It increases the reliability of findings by cross-referencing the
accuracy of different data-generating processes. Additionally, triangulation
is an important method for mitigating researcher bias because it forces an
analyst to consider multiple perspectives and can reveal prejudices underlying
a single data source (Fusch et al. 2018). It is also a method especially well
suited for the relational peace framework since no single method is likely
to capture all of the framework’s components. Of course, triangulation is
not without its limits. Although the aim is to draw on the best of each

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

104

Relational peace practices

method, it does not eliminate the methods’ flaws. I have, therefore, drawn
on a diverse set of sources that complement one another rather than those
that reproduce biases. In this way, between-method triangulation increases
confidence in my claims in this chapter because the different types of evidence
I use strengthen the validity of both descriptive and causal inferences (Brady
and Collier 2010: 310).
What I ultimately find is not only that peace and conflict coexist within
and between political elites in Cyprus, but also that these relationships have
evolved in varied and often clashing ways. For instance, while deliberation
between Greek and Turkish leaders through formal peace processes is a
hallmark of the Cyprus problem, there has been considerably less room to
exchange competing views within the Greek Cypriot community. At various
points in time, this lack of deliberation has served as a critical barrier to
reaching a political solution, as well as to developing cooperation across
communities. This chapter further illustrates how the components of the
relational peace framework can be mutually reinforcing. The failure to
reform the school curricula in the Republic of Cyprus has, for example,
also bolstered cultural forms of dominance on the island.
The remainder of this chapter proceeds in five parts. In the following
section, I discuss existing research on the Cyprus dispute and emphasize
why a negative peace framework remains insufficient. I then examine the
three components of the relational peace framework. Each section of the
chapter includes an operationalization of the component and additional
detail on the dyads of political elites examined. My analysis of behavioral
interactions is the most extensive section because it offers a direct comparison
to what a negative peace framework attempts to capture. Demonstrating
how the relational peace framework reveals additional complexity in this
component, as well as shedding light on other dimensions of peace, offers
a compelling case for the value of adopting this alternative. Finally, I consider
the broader implications of my analysis for the relational peace framework
and contemporary efforts to bring a lasting peace to Cyprus and similar
intractable conflicts in the concluding section.

Current approaches to the Cyprus problem
A substantial literature exists on Cyprus and its politics, most of which is
centered on how to resolve the protracted conflict on the island.5 A majority
of scholars acknowledge that the situation is complex, multi-causal, and
nuanced. At the same time, peace and conflict scholars typically highlight
two distinct factors as the driving obstacles to a permanent settlement:
ethno-nationalism and foreign powers. Each factor takes a negative peace
framework as a primary point of reference.
Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

105

Ethno-nationalism
One commonly used approach to understanding the Cyprus problem stresses
the role of ethno-nationalism. This strand of research defines the Cyprus
problem as an identity-based conflict in which Greek and Turkish Cypriot
communities interpret their struggle for political autonomy, its causes, and
potential solutions along a real or perceived ethno-national divide (Wolff
2011; Vogel 2016). Existential fears, mistrust, demonization of the other,
unaddressed historical grievances, and socioeconomic inequalities fuel and
exacerbate these divisions (Azar 1985; Rouhana and Bar-Tal 1998).
The ethno-national approach pays particular attention to how competing
claims for sovereignty evolved and have become reified over time, especially
in relation to periods of intercommunal violence (Vogel 2016). The two
ethnic communities were widely dispersed across the island and functioned
more or less separately during the four centuries prior to independence
(Ioannides 2014). This changed, however, with the guerrilla campaign against
the British that erupted in 1955 (French 2015). The conflict, waged by the
insurgent group EOKA (National Organization of Cypriot Fighters), was
the culmination of longstanding and increasingly assertive calls by the Greek
Cypriot community for enosis, a political union with Greece. British forces
remained the focus of EOKA attacks, but intercommunal violence was not
uncommon. In response, Turkish Cypriots formed the TMT (Turkish Defense
Organization) and asserted their own ethno-national demands, which called
for partition of the island into separate ethnic communities (taksim).
The end of the guerrilla war in 1959 saw the British withdrawal from
the Island, but intercommunal tensions and competing ethno-nationalist
claims persisted despite attempts to address them through the 1960 constitution (Salem 1992). That document set up a complex power-sharing arrangement that included a national legislature and two communal chambers
(Jarstad 2001). In addition, it established separate municipal administrations
for the two groups in the five largest cities on the island. Archbishop Makarios
III, head of the Church of Cyprus, was named the first president of the new
republic, while Dr. Fazil Kutchuk, the main leader of the Turkish Cypriot
community, served as vice-president.
Leaders of each community quickly sought to exploit the new system
(Salem 1992; Jarstad 2001). This culminated in a 1963 proposal by Archbishop Makarios III to amend the constitution in such a way as to undermine
most of the privileges enjoyed by the Turkish Cypriot community (James
2001). In protest, Turkish Cypriot leaders withdrew from the government,
and a new round of intercommunal violence broke out in December of the
same year. Hostilities became so intense over the next few months that
Makarios requested that the UN deploy a peacekeeping force, which it did
in March 1964. Still, violence and segregation between the two communities
Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

106

Relational peace practices

continued through the subsequent decade until Turkish military involvement
and de facto partition of the island in 1974.

Foreign powers
A second approach to understanding the Cyprus problem shifts the analytic
lens toward colonial politics and the regional interests of foreign powers.
On the first point, numerous studies demonstrate how the British “divide
and rule” policy exacerbated communal tensions on the island (Pollis 1973;
Argyriou 2018). The advisory British Legislative Council established in
1882 provides one striking illustration. This representative body, meant to
advise British officials, initially consisted of nine Greek and three Turkish
Cypriots, elected by their respective communities. The process, however,
superimposed political identities on religiously and ethnically defined communities that previously did not view themselves as such (see Faustmann
1998). It also created controversy over representation. In 1924, when the
island became a Crown Colony, Greek Cypriot membership on the council
was expanded while Turkish participation remained unchanged. Thus, even
as the British tried to establish representative political institutions, they also
strengthened identification within each community, sharpened the cleavages
between them, and drew the communities into political relationships to
which they did not previously subscribe (Holland 1998; Rappas 2014).
Of equal, if not greater, consequence has been the role of Greece and
Turkey since the 1950s. Both countries were directly involved in British
attempts to reach a peaceful resolution to the EOKA insurgency. Indeed, it
was the two countries’ foreign ministers that were largely responsible for
the Zurich Agreement that finally brought an end to the conflict and independence for Cyprus (Holland 1998: 302–305; French 2015: 288–290). A
key component, along with the 1960 constitution that followed, was powersharing arrangements for each ethnic community (Souter 1984). The
imposition of a peace treaty and a rigid constitution that reinforced religious
and ethnic divisions, of course, did not achieve their intended effect. Within
three years, intense intercommunal violence reignited. This was followed
by increased interference in Greek Cypriot politics by the military junta in
Greece, which sought to replace Makarios with a leader who would more
aggressively advance the cause of enosis. In 1974, Turkish military forces
moved onto the island, ostensibly to protect Turkish Cypriots in the north.

The limits of current approaches
Current approaches to understanding the Cyprus problem focus almost
exclusively on intercommunal divisions. Some disagreement persists as to

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

107

the primary driver of these tensions, especially regarding the degree to which
they predate British colonial rule. However, two important assumptions are
shared. The first is that the two communities are relatively homogeneous.
Even when acknowledging the social construction of Greek and Turkish
Cypriot identities, extant studies tend to conceptualize and report a shared
set of anxieties and preferences for each group. This is particularly evident
in studies that draw on public opinion data, which routinely report the
majority view of each society (Hadjipavlou 2007; Stevens 2016). Far less
attention, if any at all, is paid to variation within these groups. A second
key assumption concerns the unit of analysis. The majority of studies either
focus on the whole of the island or treat one side as a homogeneous population. Consequently, they focus on areas where conflict does or does not
persist, rather than investigating who within those areas may be cooperating
or competing.
Both assumptions have important policy implications. Because the Cyprus
problem is understood as being driven by intercommunal divisions, peace
processes focus on improving dialogue between Greek and Turkish Cypriot
citizens and/or ensuring group rights. This, however, can also reinforce
social divisions – much like the above-mentioned British Legislative Council.
Additionally, most peace processes concentrate on the idea of territorial
unification and political representation based on ethnicity. This obscures
other tensions and peaceful interactions, along with alternative ways in
which Greek and Turkish Cypriots organize politically. These complexities
are precisely what a relational view of peace seeks to capture.

Behavioral interactions in Cyprus
The first component of a relational peace framework involves behavioral
interaction (Söderström et al. 2021; Jarstad et al., this volume, Introduction).
This includes three main elements: deliberation, non-domination, and
cooperation. The initial two elements have evolved in different and sometimes
contradictory ways within and across Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities.
There is significantly less variation when it comes to cooperation within
and between these groups.

Deliberation in Cyprus
Deliberation refers to “the exchange of views combined with actors involved
giving reasons for their positions” (Söderström et al. 2021: 489). The
establishment of, and participation in, political processes whereby key conflict
issues can be addressed without turning to violence is a key indicator of

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

108

Relational peace practices

this component. Parliament, the education sector, the media, and formal
peace talks stand out as four of the most important arenas for political
discussion in Cyprus. Yet, perhaps counterintuitively, there has been more
room for deliberation between the two communities than within each of
them. One reason for this is that the conflict in Cyprus has been as much
a struggle over the territory of the island as it has been a battle for hegemony
within each community (Loizos 1998; Lacher and Kaymak 2005).

Deliberation within the Greek Cypriot community
The first parliamentary elections in Cyprus were held on July 31, 1960.
Rather than the parliament becoming a site for deliberation, however,
infighting among Greek Cypriot leaders quickly undermined the efficacy of
this legislative body. Many Greek Cypriot politicians worried, for instance,
that the 1960 constitution was a symbol of defeat for their community.
Consequently, they urged Archbishop Makarios to advance constitutional
modifications that favored Greek over Turkish Cypriots (Souter 1984;
Richmond 2002).
The secret right-wing nationalist group known as EOK, or the Akritas
organization, was particularly active in advancing this cause. It was formed
by Greek Cypriot community leaders and a number of cabinet members.
In 1963, EOK authored a plan that formally called for the weakening of
the Turkish Cypriot wing of the government and pursuit once more of
enosis, or the political union of Cyprus with Greece (Necatigil 1993). The
influence of EOK, along with the refusal of Turkish Cypriot legislatures to
approve fiscal legislation, eventually led Makarios to introduce constitutional
amendments that sparked a constitutional crisis and intercommunal violence
in 1963–1964.
The archbishop acted in part to appease right-wing nationalists within
his community. However, he did not go far enough for them. Even as
intercommunal fighting abated in 1967, dissent from public officials within
the Greek Cypriot community intensified. Yet Makarios’s attention remained
on reestablishing political stability on the island rather than union with
Greece after his reelection in 1968 (Mayes 1981; Assos 2018). This policy
increasingly frustrated a number of religious and nationalist leaders. The
former included three of the highest-ranking bishops on the island (i.e., the
Metropolitans of Paphos, Kition, and Kyrenia), who called for Makarios’s
resignation as president in 1973. As discussed further below, this not only
undercut political discussion on the island, but also contributed to forms
of domination that put a check on public dissent.
The media in Cyprus reflected similar tensions to those in parliament
during the 1960s and 1970s. Even though there were both right-wing and

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

109

left-wing TV stations and radio channels, the right dominated in terms of
number and resources. As a result, right-wing views were broadcast much
more widely and leftist positions were regularly dismissed as propaganda.
Close ties between specific print media outlets and political parties persist
today (Avraamidou and Psaltis 2019). However, the disparity has been
reduced. Since at least the 1980s, the majority of dailies, regardless of
political position, have been churning out papers seven days a week (Vassiliadou 2007).
A similar proliferation has occurred with broadcast media. The Cyprus
Broadcasting Service enjoyed a monopoly and operated as a semi-governmental
organization until 1990. Since then, Cypriots have increasingly turned to
private channels. These are predominately owned by Greek or Turkish
multimedia conglomerates. Thus, even as state policies ensure freedom of
expression and press, a cultural connection to Greece or Turkey and a
shared national view are still reinforced via the broadcast media.
The education sector provides a more contemporary example of stifled
attempts to promote deliberation within the Greek Cypriot community.
Ethnic nationalism remains a central theme in school curricula on the island.
Until quite recently, Greek Cypriots were taught the history only of Greece.
And even with the introduction of a history of Cyprus to textbooks and
classrooms, considerably less space and time is allotted to the island’s past
compared with Greek history (Koullapis 2002). A 2004 report from the
Ministry of Education and Culture in the Republic of Cyprus went so far
as to conclude, “the ideological-political framework of contemporary Cypriot
[sic] education remains Greek-Cypriot centered, narrowly ethnocentric and
culturally monolithic” (as cited in Papadakis 2008: 134–135).
Efforts by some Greek Cypriot politicians to reform the curricula remain
unsuccessful. In 2008, a newly elected leftist government established a
committee to produce a revised framework for teaching the island’s history.
The committee charged with reforming the history curriculum consisted of
five academics who consulted with a number of teacher-led working groups.
The final proposal that emerged focused on substantive knowledge and a
single narrative approach (Perikleous 2010). However, a center-right government which took power in 2013 froze the process before the curriculum
could be implemented.
Nevertheless, deliberation around the 2004 Annan Plan offers some hope
that discourse among Greek Cypriot leaders might be broadening and, at
the same time, the efficacy of ethnic outbidding waning. Ethnic outbidding
refers to a “process where ethnically-based political parties take increasingly
extreme ideological positions as a means of distancing themselves from rival
parties’ (Stewart and McGauvran 2020: 405). The Democratic Party (DIKO)
and the Movement for Social Democracy (EDEK), in particular, engaged in

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

110

Relational peace practices

this process in the period leading up to the public referendum on the Annan
Plan by appealing to Greek Cypriot concerns around property rights, security,
and collective identity (Avraamidou 2018; Amaral 2019). And these appeals
did achieve their short-term goal: the majority of Greek Cypriots rejected
the peace agreement, as discussed at the start of this chapter. However,
ethnic outbidding did not lead to subsequent electoral gains for either party
nor did it escalate to violence. Rather, the Democratic Rally (DISY) party
peacefully maintained its dominance in elections despite supporting the
referendum when the majority of its members and the public did not (Vural
and Peristianis 2008).
One key reason why ethnic outbidding may have worked for the referendum
but not for subsequent voting lies in the difference in frames employed by
the two sides (Moore et al. 2014). Despite advice from the opposition
parties’ own communication advisors to avoid “brutal patriotic propaganda”
and “soften their language towards moderation,” DIKO, EDEK, and other
groups adopted more ideologically extreme positions than DISY during and
after the referendum (as cited in Moore et al. 2014: 172–173). In contrast,
DISY employed an adaptable and prognostic framing strategy. It emphasized,
for instance, pragmatic gains to increase the influence of Cyprus within
European institutions (Katsourides 2014). At the same time, DISY selectively
drew on identity issues during election periods, which included slogans
stating that “Cyprus is Greek” (Moore et al. 2014: 174, see also Sandal
and Loizides 2013). Thus, deliberations over the 2004 Annan Plan suggest
that while ethnic outbidding has not entirely disappeared from the Cypriot
landscape, political elites that also give explicit, strategic reasons for their
actions have fared better in the long term. Moreover, the non-violent, public
disagreement that occurred during the 2004 referendum stands in stark
contrast to the belligerent interactions between groups with competing
viewpoints in the 1960s.

Deliberation between the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities
While deliberation within the Greek Cypriot community remains muted,
the exchange of competing views between the two communities has been
a central feature of peace talks since even before partition. Many analyses
capture this. However, they also often point to intercommunal, rather than
intracommunal, differences as the reason why talks break down.
Following the reelection of Archbishop Makarios in 1968, for example,
UN-sponsored talks began to develop a system of local government which
would have given Turkish Cypriots a degree of local autonomy (Polyviou
1980). The main representatives at these meetings were the presidents of

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

111

the communal chambers, Glafkos Clerides for the Greek Cypriot side and
Rauf Raif Denktaş on the Turkish Cypriot side. These formal discussions
offered the space to present both competing views and the reasons behind
them. However, no consensus was reached by 1970, at which time SecretaryGeneral U Thant called off the talks, blaming both sides’ leaders for their
inability to compromise (Mirbagheri 2014). As discussed above, one major
constraint on the Greek Cypriot leadership was intracommunal pressure
from religious and political elites to hold out for full union with Greece.
Indeed, the more Makarios tried to focus on political stability rather than
enosis, the more opposition he faced from within his community.
Talks in 1977 made substantially more progress. This time President
Makarios and Vice-President Denktaş met directly. After five rounds of
UN-managed talks, the two leaders signed a four-point agreement confirming
that any future Cyprus settlement would be based on a federation. Other
details were to be worked out at a later time, but the death of Makarios
in August 1977 prevented such an outcome. Instead, Spyros Achilleos
Kyprianou, the archbishop’s successor and leader of the Democratic Party,
rejected the plan in 1979 (Souter 1984).
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to detail all of the peace talks that
have taken place over the past five decades. Collectively they demonstrate
that deliberation between the two communities has not been absent. They
also indicate that there is more room for political dissent within the Greek
Cypriot community than there is between Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities. Take the most recent round of stalled UN-sponsored peace talks,
which began in 2017. After initial optimism, the special advisor appointed
to lead the effort, Jane Holl Lute, reported after an April 2019 meeting that
the two sides seemed more divided than ever and subsequently recommended
the negotiations be suspended indefinitely (Congressional Research Service
2019). This episode also raises questions about other factors that can influence the space for dialogue. Non-domination is one important permissive
condition.

Non-domination in Cyprus
Non-domination refers to a freedom from the arbitrary influence of a more
powerful actor. In line with the Introduction of this volume, I operationalize
non-domination as the extent to which elites and others adapt or moderate
their behavior in the shadow of more powerful actors (Jarstad et al., this
volume, Introduction). This is an especially apt allusion for Cyprus. The
two communities literally live under the shadow of each other’s communal
symbols, with flags and other nationalist images prolific on the island.

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

112

Relational peace practices

Accordingly, I look at both explicit and implicit forms of coercion in this
section.

Domination within the Greek Cypriot community
Violence or the threat of violence characterized many relations between
Greek Cypriot elites and community members before partition. During the
insurgency war of the 1950s, for instance, EOKA killed far more civilians
than British security forces did. This was because they targeted defectors
from the group and local leaders that cooperated with British authorities.
Moreover, they often conducted the assassination of defectors publicly with
the explicit aim of deterring similar behavior in the future (see French 2015:
111–114).
Following Makarios’s reelection in 1968 and his refusal to further advance
the cause of unification with Greece, General Georgios Grivas formed EOKA-B
as a successor organization to the insurgent group he had led a decade
earlier. It was supported by a number of pro-enosis members in parliament,
as well as clergy in the Church of Cyprus. For several years, the organization
engaged in a campaign of sabotage and civilian attacks that culminated in
a short-lived coup against Archbishop Makarios in July 1974 (Assos 2018).
Makarios weathered that attempt, in part thanks to the Efedriko, a special
police force he created with support from the leaders of EDEK.
Over the years, this type of violence has given way to less explicit – but
no less influential – forms of coercion, and indeed domination. The most
notable is an ethos that Loizos characterizes as “obsessive ethnic nationalism”
(Loizos 1998: 40). This perspective not only limits room for debate but
actively demonizes those who express opposition and demands they be
silenced. Its persistence is particularly striking not just in the school curricula
discussed above, but also in how teachers in Cyprus structure their classrooms
and lessons. A number of studies, for example, find that teachers are hesitant
to discuss controversial periods in the past, especially those that challenge
one-sided victimization narratives (see Zembylas 2015). Thus, even when
the threat of violence is removed, institutionalized norms continue to shape
the behavior of educators on the island.
Self-censorship among elites and within the broader Greek Cypriot community is another marker of this persistent ethos. For instance, during
fieldwork I conducted in Nicosia in the winter of 2015, most of my interlocutors regulated what they did and did not share about the past. Discussion
of intercommunal violence or tension no longer appears to be an entirely
taboo subject. However, when I would bring up specific events or actors,
my conversation partners, especially those older than fifty, would quickly
steer the conversation back to general terms. Part of the reason for this may

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

113

have been that I was an outsider. However, Cypriot-born scholar Papadakis
(2006) observed similar behavior during his fieldwork in the 1990s. One
particularly telling example comes from his time in coffee shops, which
were rigidly split along ideological lines. Certain cafes hosted right-wing
nationalist party leaders and members, such as the Progressive Front and
the Democratic National Party, and others were for leftist party leaders and
members, the most notable being the Progressive Party of Working People
(AKEL). Both of our experiences suggest that even in the absence of societal
violence, Greek Cypriots remain guarded in their political discussions and
behavior.

Domination between the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities
Forms of symbolic domination persist even more between the two communities than within Greek Cypriot society. In the north, an image of the
flag of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is displayed on the side of
Beşparmaklar mountain. Next to the image is the quotation “How happy
is the one who says ‘I am a Turk.’” Both are impossible to miss when
approaching Nicosia. Furthermore, in 2009, a Greek Cypriot Member of
the European Parliament submitted an official complaint about the symbols,
describing them as an “unprecedented daily provocation” and a “hostile
action” (Papadopoulou 2009).
Such symbolism is, of course, not absent south of the partition line. In
1987, a ten-meter-high bronze statue of Makarios III was erected outside
the archbishop’s palace in the capital. It stood as a towering landmark until
2008, when it was moved to the archbishop’s mausoleum in the Troodos
mountains. Speculation remains as to whether its position facing toward
the northern end of the island is intentional (Assos 2018).
The symbols that dominate the skyline also overshadow the streets of
Cyprus. The Greek flag is an example par excellence. One can hardly travel
around the Republic of Cyprus without spotting the “sky blue and white”
on homes, stores, stadiums, ships, and even beach resorts. On Greek national
holidays, the numbers increase exponentially. And the impact of this practice
is unambiguous. Turkish Cypriots routinely state that they see the Greek
flag as a symbol of “domination, degradation, siege, and violence” that
embodies all of their negative experiences prior to 1960 (Anastasiou 2002:
587). The seriousness of this issue led the UN to go so far during the 1990s
as to regulate when Greek or Turkish flags could be flown in villages that
bordered the Green Line (Papadakis 1997). Despite this effort, however,
the number of flags has swelled in recent years.
The symbolic domination within and across communities has reinforced
social divisions and produced contestation around the physical development

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

114

Relational peace practices

of the island (Björkdahl and Kappler 2017: 13–31). And while several peace
movements have tried to reshape the politics of these physical places, elites
and local media outlets continue to exploit them for their political ends.
For example, in a 2004 speech opposing the Annan Peace Plan, President
Papadopoulos addressed the public as “Greek Cypriot people” – a term
that had not been used in decades and before then used exclusively by
Archbishop Makarios (Cyprus News Agency 2004). Papadopoulos’s speech
resulted in a spontaneous mass gathering in front of the presidential palace
with hundreds waving Cypriot flags and, ultimately, the failure of that peace
plan (Loizides 2007).

Cooperation in Cyprus
If deliberation and non-domination concern the external and internal space
to express dissent, cooperation shifts attention to activities that bring communities together. This involves taking steps that benefit both sides, as well
as adopting common goals and identities (Söderström et al. 2021: 492).
Despite various attempts to bring Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities
together, including a bi-communal citizen-based peace movement that has
grown since the 1990s, cooperation within and between the two communities
remains elusive.6
Formal peace talks stand out as the most illustrative examples of a failure
to identify common goals at the elite level. Since 2004, Greek and Turkish
leaders have increasingly talked in terms of “convergences” related to EU
affairs, governance, economics, citizenship, and disputed individual property.
This term is notable, as it embodies the overriding frame for more recent
negotiations – that nothing is agreed until everything is agreed (Congressional Research Service 2019). Leaders no longer seem willing or able to
enter into agreements like the 1997 Makarios–Denktaş accords, which
settled the federation question but left other issues on the table. If anything,
the interests and goals that might unite the two sides have only become
opaquer.
A 2015 public opinion survey suggests that consensus within and between
communities remains just as elusive at the local level (Psaltis et al. 2017:
72–75). In particular, efforts to engender a shared identity for inhabitants
of the island remain hampered by what that might entail in practice. Two
thirds of the survey respondents from the Republic of Cyprus, for instance,
favored the development of a common “Cypriot identity.” Sixteen percent,
however, expressed that such a project would also be detrimental to national
interests. Moreover, when they were asked what factors were key for a
“Cypriot identity,” sharp divisions within and between the two communities
emerged. For instance, one third of Greek Cypriot respondents said a love

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

115

of the homeland should form the basis of a common identity, whereas a
mere 2 percent of Turkish Cypriot respondents shared the same view. Instead,
Turkish Cypriots were much more likely to point to a shared past, culture,
and temperament. There was also disagreement about the best timing for
cultivating a common Cypriot identity. Turkish Cypriots were three times
as likely as Greek Cypriots to say that a common identity was a prerequisite
for any permanent solution. Greek Cypriots were again divided, with nearly
a quarter stating that the development of a common identity should never
happen. Other research, including a 2013 interview study conducted with
youth in Nicosia, corroborates these patterns (Leonard 2013). This, undoubtedly, also has effects on the subjective attitudes of each group and their idea
of relationship with one another.

Subjective attitudes in Cyprus
Peaceful relations involve more than just behaviors; they also encompass
how groups perceive one another. These subjective attitudes include patterns
of mutual recognition and trust. I assess mutual recognition by identifying
explicit and symbolic acts of acceptance of the other’s existence. Trust, in
turn, involves a psychological state whereby actors have a positive expectation of the intentions or behavior of another and can express vulnerability
(Söderström et al. 2021: 494). Like behavioral interactions, attitudes have
moved in contrasting directions within and between the communities in
Cyprus.

Recognition and trust within the Greek Cypriot community
Following independence, the infighting among elites was marked by a refusal
to accept those with competing visions for the future of Cyprus. Consider
again the coup attempt against Makarios in July 1974. In many ways,
the archbishop became a victim of the ideology he spearheaded in the
1950s. During the insurgency war, the motto of Greek Cypriot religious
leaders and EOKA fighters was “enosis and only enosis” (French 2015:
25). Yet when the archbishop tried to consolidate his authority after British
withdrawal through a loose coalition known as the Patriotic Front, some
were unwilling to abandon that call. And, as discussed above, a small,
but influential opposition movement consisting of right-wing religious and
political officials eventually tried to forcibly remove Makarios from office.
This example also highlights the relational aspect of recognition; it is an
interaction between an actor’s asserted image and the image perceived by
others (Lindemann 2011).

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

116

Relational peace practices

Since at least the 1974 partition, Greek Cypriot politics have settled into
a more routine set of activities with four major parties: DIKO, DISY, EDEK,
and AKEL. Moreover, the Republic’s proportional representation system
has necessitated compromise and coalition-building since no single party
enjoys the support of a majority of voters. For instance, the left-wing party
EDEK formed an alliance with the centrist party DIKO during the early
2000s. Together they promoted a closer cultural, though not political,
connection with Greece (Peristianis 2006).
This is not to say that a thick form of recognition has emerged. Elections
remain deeply contested, especially between candidates on opposite ends
of the ideological spectrum (i.e., those of DIKO and AKEL). Still, a thin
form of recognition has developed whereby elites accept that competing
parties have the equal right to participate in politics. For example, while
communist parties were banned from 1931 to 1941 and during the insurgency
war, the current communist party, AKEL, has participated in every election
since 1960 (Dunphy and Bale 2007).
Mutual recognition developed among political elites by the 1970s, but
social spaces continued to reflect ideological differences for several decades
more. As discussed above, coffee shops in cities and villages were rigidly
split as late as the 1990s, with some establishments being reserved for
right-wing nationalist parties and others hosting leftist organizations. Not
only did political officials and members regulate which cafes they frequented,
but Greek Cypriots also self-policed the reading materials they brought with
them (Papadakis 2006). This latter point is a striking example of the lack
of mutual trust that persisted more broadly within the Greek Cypriot community for several decades as party affiliation created and reinforced negative
expectations about the other.
What conclusions can we draw about levels of mutual trust today? It is
difficult to infer attitudes from behavior, but the relatively peaceful relations
within the Greek Cypriot community suggest that stereotyping and prejudices
along ideological lines are minimal. Public opinion surveys would be an
even more effective way to measure popular trust, but these can be difficult
to implement and interpret in Cyprus. One reason for this is that surveys
typically take the ethnic community as their unit of analysis and report only
aggregate responses. This provides insight into how average levels of trust
have changed between the two communities over time, but we still know
far less about change in subjective attitudes within the Greek Cypriot community (or Turkish Cypriot society, for that matter). To my knowledge, no
surveys have been designed to intentionally compare differences in the
attitudes of citizens in major cities of the Republic of Cyprus. Additionally,
there is the self-censorship discussed above, raising questions about how
openly Greek Cypriots would share their views if asked. The polls cited in

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

117

this chapter do provide the demographic backgrounds of respondents, but
this is not always the case. Of course, it is not always possible to avoid all
bias in a sample. Yet several surveys seem to actually introduce it by restricting
their sample owing to the preferences of funding organizations, rather than
methodological grounds. For example, Webster (2005) relied on data from
an omnibus survey conducted by a market research firm. That organization
excluded respondents aged over sixty-five because that demographic was
of limited interest to the commercial organization. The study, despite this
sampling bias, still claimed that the data were a generally representative
sample of the government-controlled areas of Cyprus (Webster 2005: 82).
While there may be reasons to suspect that public trust has increased
within the Greek Cypriot community, the same cannot be said of political
trust. Most notably, the 2012–2013 economic crisis appears to have engendered suspicion of political elites as a whole and contributed to voter disillusionment (Triga 2017). According to the 2013 Eurobarometer survey, for
instance, 91 percent of Cypriots responded that they did not trust their
political parties (Eurobarometer 2013). This ranked Cyprus as the second
highest on this measure in Europe that year. Moreover, confidence in political
parties has yet to rebound, with some 88 percent of Cypriots still expressing
no trust in political parties nearly five years later (Eurobarometer 2017).
Thus, even as political parties in Cyprus have gradually come to recognize
one another, the divide between political parties and the Cypriot populace
has grown.

Recognition and trust between the Greek and
Turkish Cypriot communities
While intracommunal divisions and non-recognition characterized party
politics in the years leading up to and immediately after independence,
connections between workers’ parties in Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities stand out as a remarkable example of intercommunal recognition
and trust. During the 1930s and 1940s, for example, Greek and Turkish
Cypriots frequently interacted through left-wing workers’ institutions
(Papadakis 2006). Later too, a clear sense of mutual recognition persisted
throughout the 1950s and early 1960s. One telling indicator of this is the
practice of official and unofficial AKEL publications reporting attacks by
Greek Cypriots against Turkish Cypriots (Papadakis 2006: 72).
Other, especially more contemporary, examples of mutual recognition
are few and far between. One is the outcome of the Aziz vs. Republic of
Cyprus case in the European Court of Human Rights, which restored some
individual civil rights to Turkish Cypriots residing in the Republic of Cyprus
(Trimikliniotis and Demetriou 2008). It has not, however, restored any of

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

118

Relational peace practices

the communal rights laid out in the 1960 constitution. Another example
of a thin form of mutual recognition is Article Six of the current constitution
of Cyprus, which explicitly prohibits discrimination of either Greek or
Turkish Cypriots based on race.
Far more common, however, are instances of non-recognition or active
attempts to erase the history of the other community. Here the most conspicuous example is the desecration of cemeteries and worship spaces on both
sides of the island (Björkdahl and Kappler 2017: 36). North of the Green
Line, crosses have been broken off tombstones and icons destroyed. In the
Republic of Cyprus, the burial grounds of Turkish Cypriots have been
abandoned and vandalized. All of this is compounded by the fact that Greek
and Turkish Cypriots have limited interaction because of the formal partition
of the island. Nearly three-quarters of both Greek and Turkish Cypriots
report they do not maintain any relations and/or contact with members of
the other community (Psaltis et al. 2017: 72–75). This isolation has created
conditions that make it difficult to advance mutual recognition or trust
between elites or citizens. It also has implications for the third component
of relational peace.

Ideas of the relationship in Cyprus
Relational peace involves not just behavioral interactions and subjective
attitudes, but also actors’ ideas of how they relate to one another. As
discussed in the Introduction to this volume, the idea of relationship lies
along a continuum from foe to fellow to friend. What demarcates these
categories is the extent to which they hold a shared vision about society.
Here I evaluate these on the basis of words and deeds of political elites.
Like the other components, relations within the Greek Cypriot community
have taken a form that differs from those between them and their Turkish
Cypriot counterparts.
The contemporary Greek Cypriot community, especially at the elite level,
is best characterized as a fellowship. One indicator of this is the evolution
of the House of Representatives. Despite its shaky beginnings, the Cypriot
parliament has emerged as a deliberative body where parties compete in
non-violent ways to advance their vision for the future of Cyprus (Charalambous 2009). As discussed above, political leaders now recognize each other
as peers and even form coalitions in order to govern. But this does not
mean there are warm feelings between them or that they share a single
vision of what the future of Cyprus entails.
Similar ideas characterize the broader Greek Cypriot community. Roughly
half of respondents to public opinion polls conducted in 2006 and 2007,

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

119

for instance, selected “Cypriot” in response to a question that asked how
they personally identified (Faustmann 2009). Another third of respondents
chose the category of equally Greek and Cypriot. The smallest percentage
of respondents identified as more Greek than Cypriot. A more recent poll,
conducted in 2015, shows similar results (Psaltis et al. 2017: 72–75). These
surveys demonstrate that while debate persists, disagreements are construed
as legitimate.
Relations between Greek and Turkish Cypriots have evolved differently.
Prior to independence, one could make an argument that a fellowship also
existed at this level. The two communities acted more or less separately
prior to the mid-twentieth century (Ioannides 2014). However, each group
accepted the right of the other group to exist and cooperated through a
number of political institutions as outlined above. The division of the island
has once again isolated the two communities, but now the overarching idea
of relationship may be more that of foes than that of fellows, especially at
the elite level.
This was neither an inevitable outcome nor did it occur uniformly within
the two societies. In 1963, Turkish Cypriot officials withdrew from government
following Makarios’s proposed amendments favoring Greek Cypriots. Yet
even after those formal ties were severed, left-wing parties on the two sides
continued to express strong feelings of mutual solidarity until 1974. Their
leaders expressed both a common ideological emphasis on being “Cypriot
first” and a shared sense of victimization from nationalist parties within
their communities (Papadakis 2006). Moreover, as discussed above, they
publicly reported attacks by members of their own societies.
Interactions among Greek and Turkish elites are now reduced to formal
peace talks. It may be tempting to see this as a form of fellowship, as both
sides recognize the authority of the other and are engaging in a common
exercise to advance a more lasting peace. However, a deeper look at negotiations offers a more cautionary note. For instance, a round of negotiations
between President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Dervis
Eroglu in 2010 raises questions about whether the two sides really see one
another as worthy of respect or simply engage in talks because external
forces pressure them into doing so. The meeting was held under the auspices
of the UN Secretary-General’s special advisor in Cyprus, Alexander Downer.
After just four months, Eroglu expressed his frustration with the process
in an interview with Greek Cypriot press and accused the Greek Cypriots
of treating Turkish Cypriot positions with contempt (Cyprus Mail 2010).
Moreover, in the most recent round of talks (2017–2019) doubt has even
been expressed about terms that were thought to be settled more than a
decade ago, such as the formation of a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation
(Andreou 2020).

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

120

Relational peace practices

Conclusion
A relational view of peace underscores the complexity of associations that
exist both within and across communities in Cyprus. Most importantly, this
chapter highlights considerable variation within Greek Cypriot society, an
issue overlooked by a negative peace framework. Attention to within-group
competition and cooperation demonstrates that the Cyprus conflict is less
static than past analyses suggest. It further brings to light a problematic
asymmetry between intercommunal and intracommunal relations. Efforts
to advance the former are often undermined and exacerbated by within-group
differences. A relational peace framework also shifts the analytic lens away
from ethno-nationalism and foreign interests to the strategic priorities of
and actions within each community. This underscores how intercommunal
relations are difficult to advance while within-group competition is high.
Finally, a relational view of peace raises important questions about civil-society
peacebuilding efforts that aim to improve dialogue across communities.
This is a worthy goal. But so too should be efforts to increase the diversity
of viewpoints within Greek Cypriot society.
Cyprus is not alone in facing such challenges. This chapter and the relational
peace framework more broadly can speak to other longstanding interethnic
conflicts, especially those where domestic identities overlap with regional
powers. These include active conflicts such as those in Kashmir and Myanmar
and places where peace deals have been signed but tensions persist, such
as Northern Ireland, the Balkans, and South Sudan. The Israeli–Palestinian
conflict also stands out for its striking similarities to Cyprus. An armed
struggle against British rule led to the establishment of the State of Israel
in 1948. Intercommunal violence preceded and continued long after British
withdrawal. And an endless series of peace processes have taken the division
between the two communities as their starting point. As in Cyprus, internal
politics within Israeli and Palestinian societies have played a pivotal role in
undermining attempts at a lasting peace. The most notable example is the
role of factional politics within the Palestine Liberation Organization, which
limited Arafat’s bargaining position during the Camp David Accords. It is
telling that foreign policy and conflict scholars have not explored that factor
until very recently (see Anziska 2018).
This chapter is, of course, not without its limitations. The most notable of
these concerns what is not analyzed. I do not examine variation within the
Turkish Cypriot communities, nor do I look at Greek- or Turkish-language
sources. A more systematic study of the Turkish Cypriot community and
primary sources would add nuance to the investigation. Whether it would
contradict the findings is unclear. If anything, a deeper dive into the deliberations of each community might reveal more, not less, internal dissent.

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

121

Moreover, the examined sources are public and, for the most part, represent
a consensus view of the political parties. These were most likely preceded
by internal debate, which would only further demonstrate the multifaceted
nature of the communities. Nevertheless, attention to the Turkish Cypriot
community and the analysis of primary documents in a future study would
be a welcome way to provide additional insight into communities and a
peace that are often assumed to be uniform and static.
This chapter also has not systematically explored the interplay between
the components of the relational peace framework. Rather, it has pointed
out several ways in which the components can be mutually reinforcing.
Questions remain as to whether certain components are more influential or
should be prioritized by peacebuilders at particular times or during particular
activities, such as formal negotiations, or in a certain order. Additional
study could shed light on these issues and identify specific mechanisms that
might build on advances in one area to promote change in another.
To conclude, analysts all too quickly apply a negative peace framework
to interethnic conflicts such as Cyprus. They construe conflict parties as
homogeneous communities and frame failed efforts to promote a more
lasting peace as a consequence of relations between, not within, these societies.
The relational peace framework and the case of Cyprus challenge this
conventional approach. They draw attention to opportunities for cooperation,
while also providing a cautionary note that some relations can remain
competitive and resistant to change over time. Interactions may also not
necessarily move in a linear direction, as for example with efforts to identify
common goals during elite negotiations. Shared understandings that characterized peace talks in the late 1990s, for instance, no longer seem to be held
in common. It is, therefore, never just a simple question of settlement or
no settlement between two communities.

Notes
1 These include the 2008–2010 Christofias–Talat negotiations, the 2010–2012
Christofias–Eroglu negotiations, the 2014 Anastasiades–Eroglu negotiations, and
the 2015–2017 Anastasiades–Akinci peace talks.
2 Cyprus also boasts one of the longest-standing peacekeeping missions, the UN
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), which began in 1964.
3 In line with the extant scholarship on Cyprus, I refer to the Cyprus problem,
conflict, dispute, stalemate, and issue interchangeably. For consistency, I use the
first nomenclature most often.
4 The archival research focused primarily on the Emergency Period (1955–1959)
and the years immediately following independence. I reviewed records from the
War, Foreign, and Colonial Offices, along with the Foreign and Commonwealth

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

122

Relational peace practices

Offices’ migrated archives. The latter has been available to the public only since
2013.
5 For a general history of politics on the island, see Souter 1984; Holland 1998;
Papadakis et al. 2006; Dodd 2010; Ker-Lindsay 2011; Bryant and Papadakis
2012.
6 For a summary of the peace movement, see Anastasiou 2002.

References
Amaral, Joana. 2019. Making Peace with Referendums: Cyprus and Northern Ireland.
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Anastasiou, Harry. 2002. “Communication across conflict lines: the case of ethnically
divided Cyprus.” Journal of Peace Research 39(5): 581–596.
Andreou, Evie. 2020. “Akinci says won’t make move on Cyprus problem until
mandate renewed.” Cyprus Mail, June 2, 2020. https://cyprus-mail.com/2020/06/02/
akinci-says-wont-make-move-on-cyprus-problem-until-mandate-renewed/ (accessed
September 21, 2020).
Annan, Kofi. 2004. “Remarks by the Secretary-General on the final settlement plan
for Cyprus.” Bürgenstock, Switzerland, March 13, 2004. https://www.un.org/
press/en/2004/sgsm9239.doc.htm (accessed September 21, 2020).
Anziska, Seth. 2018. Preventing Palestine: A Political History from Camp David
to Oslo. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Argyriou, Sophia. 2018. “The imperialistic foundations of British colonial rule in
Cyprus.” Cyprus Review 30(1): 297–316.
Assos, Demetris. 2018. Makarios: The Revolutionary Priest of Cyprus. London and
New York: I. B. Tauris.
Avraamidou, Maria. 2018. “Exploring Greek-Cypriot media representations of national
identities in ethnically divided Cyprus: the case of the 2002/2004 Annan Plan
negotiations.” National Identities 20(5): 439–461.
Avraamidou, Maria, and Charis Psaltis. 2019. “Blocking the solution: social representations of threats and (non) dialogue with alternative representations in
Greek-Cypriot newspapers during peace negotiations.” Journal for the Theory
of Social Behaviour 49(4): 460–479.
Azar, Edward E. 1985. “Protracted international conflicts: ten propositions.”
International Interactions 12(1): 59–70.
Björkdahl, Annika, and Stefanie Kappler. 2017. Peacebuilding and Spatial Transformation: Peace, Space and Place. New York: Routledge.
Brady, Henry, and David Collier. 2010. Rethinking Social Inquiry: Diverse Goals,
Shared Standards. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Bryant, Rebecca, and Yiannis Papadakis. 2012. Cyprus and the Politics of Memory:
History, Community and Conflict. New York: I. B. Tauris.
Charalambous, Giorgios. 2009. “The House of Representatives.” In The Government
and Politics of Cyprus, ed. James Ker-Lindsay and Hubert Faustman, 143–168.
Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang.

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

123

Congressional Research Service. 2019.“Cyprus: Reunification Proving Elusive.”
R41136. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. https://sgp.fas.org/
crs/row/R41136.pdf (accessed November 18, 2022).
Cyprus Mail. 2010. “Eroglu: treated with contempt.” September 19, 2010. https://
archives.cyprus-mail.com/2010/09/19/eroglu-treated-with-contempt/ (accessed
September 21, 2020).
Cyprus News Agency. 2004. “Address to Cypriots by President Papadopoulos (full
text).” April 8, 2004. http://www.hri.org/news/cyprus/cna/2004/04-04-08.cna.html
(accessed September 21, 2020).
Denzin, Norman K. 1970. The Research Act. Chicago: Aldine.
Denzin, Norman K. 2012. “Triangulation 2.0.” Journal of Mixed Methods Research
6(2): 80–88.
Dodd, Clement. 2010. The History and Politics of the Cyprus Conflict. New York:
Springer.
Dunphy, Richard, and Tim Bale. 2007. “Red flag still flying? Explaining AKEL –
Cyprus’s communist anomaly.” Party Politics 13(3): 287–304.
Eurobarometer. 2013. “Public opinion in the European Union, national analysis – Cyprus (autumn).” Brussels: European Commission. https://europa.eu/
eurobarometer/surveys/detail/1123 (accessed November 23, 2022).
Eurobarometer. 2017. “Public opinion in the European Union, national analysis – Cyprus (autumn).” Brussels: European Commission. https://europa.eu/
eurobarometer/surveys/detail/2143 (accessed November 23, 2022).
Faustmann, Hubert. 1998. “Clientelism in the Greek Cypriot community of Cyprus
under British rule.” The Cyprus Review 10(2): 41–77.
Faustmann, Hubert. 2009. “Aspects of political culture in Cyprus.” In The Government
and Politics of Cyprus, ed. James Ker-Lindsay and Hubert Faustmann, 17–44.
New York: Peter Lang.
French, David. 2015. Fighting EOKA: The British Counter-Insurgency Campaign
on Cyprus, 1955–1959. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fusch, Patricia, Gene E. Fusch, and Lawrence R. Ness. 2018. “Denzin’s paradigm
shift: revisiting triangulation in qualitative research.” Journal of Social Change
10(1): 2.
Hadjipavlou, Maria. 2007. “The Cyprus conflict: root causes and implications for
peacebuilding.” Journal of Peace Research 44(3): 349–365.
Heraclides, Alexis. 2011. “The Cyprus Gordian knot: an intractable ethnic conflict.”
Nationalism and Ethnic Politics 17(2): 117–139.
Holland, Robert. 1998. Britain and the Revolt in Cyprus, 1954–1959. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ioannides, Christos. 2014. “Cyprus, British colonialism and the seeds of partition:
from coexistence to communal strife.” Journal of Modern Hellenism 30: 41–72.
James, Alan. 2001. Keeping the Peace in the Cyprus Crisis of 1963–64. New York:
Springer.
Jarstad, Anna. 2001. “Changing the game: consociational theory and ethnic quotas
in Cyprus and New Zealand.” Ph.D. thesis, Department of Peace and Conflict
Research, Uppsala University.

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

124

Relational peace practices

Katsourides, Yiannos. 2014. “Partisan responses to the European Union in Cyprus.”
Journal of European Integration 36(7): 641–658.
Ker-Lindsay, James. 2011. The Cyprus Problem: What Everyone Needs to Know.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Koullapis, Loris. 2002. “The subject of history in the Greek-Cypriot education
system: a subset of the Greek nation.” In Clio in the Balkans: The Politics of
History Education, ed. Christina Koulouri, 406–422. Thessaloniki, Greece: Centre
for Democracy and Reconciliation in Southeast Europe.
Lacher, Hannes, and Erol Kaymak. 2005. “Transforming identities: beyond the politics
of non-settlement in North Cyprus.” Mediterranean Politics 10(2): 147–166.
Leonard, Madeleine. 2013. “Young people’s perspectives on conflict, reconciliation
and reunification in Cyprus.” Children’s Geographies 11(3): 326–339.
Lindemann, Thomas. 2011. “Peace through recognition: an interactionist interpretation
of international crises.” International Political Sociology 5(1): 68–86.
Loizides, Neophytos G. 2007. “Ethnic nationalism and adaptation in Cyprus.”
International Studies Perspectives 8(2): 172–189.
Loizos, Peter. 1998. “How might Turkish and Greek Cypriots see each other
more clearly?” In Cyprus and Its People: Nation, Identity and Experience in
an Unimaginable Community, ed. Vangelis Calotychos, 35–52. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Mayes, Stanley. 1981. Makarios: A Biography. New York: Macmillan Press.
Mirbagheri, Farid. 2014. Cyprus and International Peacemaking 1964–1986. New
York: Routledge.
Moore, Gavin, Neophytos Loizides, Nukhet A. Sandal, and Alexandros Lordos.
2014. “Winning peace frames: intra-ethnic outbidding in Northern Ireland and
Cyprus.” West European Politics 37(1): 159–181.
Necatigil, Zaim M. 1993. The Cyprus Question and the Turkish Position in International Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Papadakis, Yiannis. 1997. “Pyla: A mixed borderline village under UN supervision
in Cyprus.” International Journal on Minority and Group Rights 4: 353–372.
Papadakis, Yiannis. 2006. “Disclosure and censorship in divided Cyprus: toward
an anthropology of ethnic autism.” In Divided Cyprus: Modernity, History, and
an Island in Conflict, ed. Yiannis Papadakis, Nicos Peristianis, and Gisela Welz,
66–83. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Papadakis, Yiannis. 2008. “Narrative, memory and history education in divided
Cyprus: a comparison of schoolbooks on the ‘history of Cyprus.’” History &
Memory 20(2): 128–148.
Papadakis, Yiannis, Nicos Peristianis, and Gisela Welz, eds. 2006. Divided Cyprus:
Modernity, History, and an Island in Conflict. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Papadopoulou, Antigoni. 2009. “Written question by Antigoni Papadopoulou (S&D)
to the commission.” Brussels: European Parliament. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
doceo/document/E-7-2009-5053_EN.html?redirect (accessed November 23, 2022).
Perikleous, Lukas. 2010. “At a crossroad between memory and thinking: the case of
primary history education in the Greek Cypriot educational system.” Education
3–13 38(3): 315–328.

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Relational peace in Cyprus

125

Peristianis, Nicos. 2006. “Cypriot nationalism, dual identity, and politics.” In Divided
Cyprus: Modernity, History, and an Island in Conflict, ed. Yannis Papadakis,
Nicos Peristianis, and Gisela Welz, 100–120. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Pollis, Adamantia. 1973. “Intergroup conflict and British Colonial policy: the case
of Cyprus.” Comparative Politics 5(4): 575–599.
Polyviou, Polyvios G. 1980. Cyprus: Conflict and Negotiation 1960–1980. London:
Duckworth.
Psaltis, Iacovos, Nicos Anastasiou, Hubert Faustmann, Maria Hadjipavlou, Hakan
Karahasan, and Marilena Zachkeos, eds. 2017. Education in a Multicultural
Cyprus. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Rappas, Alexis. 2014. Cyprus in the 1930s: British Colonial Rule and the Roots of
the Cyprus Conflict. London: I. B. Tauris.
Richmond, Oliver P. 2002. “Decolonisation and post-independence causes of conflict:
the case of Cyprus.” Civil Wars 5(3): 163–190.
Rouhana, Nadim N., and Daniel Bar-Tal. 1998. “Psychological dynamics of intractable
ethnonational conflicts: the Israeli–Palestinian case.” American Psychologist 53(7):
761.
Salem, Norma. 1992. “The constitution of 1960 and its failure.” In Cyprus: A
Regional Conflict and Its Resolution, ed. Norma Salem, 117–125. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, Inc.
Sandal, Nukhet, and Neophytos Loizides. 2013. “Center-right parties in peace
processes: ‘slow learning’ or punctuated peace socialization?” Political Studies
61(2): 401–421.
Söderström, Johanna, Malin Åkebo, and Anna Jarstad. 2021. “Friends, fellows,
and foes: a new framework for studying relational peace.” International Studies
Review 23(3): 484–508.
Souter, David. 1984. “An island apart: a review of the Cyprus problem.” Third
World Quarterly 6(3): 657–674.
Stevens, Peter A. J. 2016. Ethnicity and Racism in Cyprus: National Pride and
Prejudice? New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stewart, Brandon, and Ronald J. McGauvran. 2020. “what do we know about
ethnic outbidding? We need to take ideology seriously.” Nationalism and Ethnic
Politics 26(4): 405–420.
Tarrow, Sidney. 2010. “Bridging the Quantitative-Qualitative Divide.” In Rethinking
Social Inquiry: Diverse Goals, Shared Standards, ed. Henry Brady and David
Collier, 101–110. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Triga, Vasiliki. 2017. “Parties and change in the post-bailout Cyprus: the May 2016
parliamentary elections.” South European Society and Politics 22(2): 261–279.
Trimikliniotis, Nicos, and Corina Demetriou. 2008. “Evaluating the anti-discrimination
law in the Republic of Cyprus.” The Cyprus Review 20(2): 79–116.
Vassiliadou, Myria. 2007. “The Cypriot media landscape.” In European Media
Governance: National and Regional Dimensions, ed. Georgios Terzis, 201–213.
Chicago: Intellect.
Vogel, Birte. 2016. “The Cyprus conflict and party–society relations: between ethnonationalism and peace formation.” In Party–Society Relations in the Republic

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

126

Relational peace practices

of Cyprus: Political and Societal Strategies, ed. Giorgios Charalambous and
Christophoros Christophorou, 151–165. New York: Routledge.
Vural, Yücel, and Nicos Peristianis. 2008. “Beyond ethno-nationalism: emerging trends
in Cypriot politics after the Annan Plan.” Nations and Nationalism 14(1): 39–60.
Webster, Craig. 2005. “Greek Cypriot perspectives on interacting with Turkish
Cypriots.” The Cyprus Review 17(1): 79–92.
Wolff, Stefan. 2011. “Managing ethno-national conflict: towards an analytical
framework.” Commonwealth & Comparative Politics 49(2): 162–195.
Zembylas, Michalinos. 2015. Emotion and Traumatic Conflict: Reclaiming Healing
in Education. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jason Klocek - 9781526168979
Downloaded from manchesterhive.com at 12/08/2023 11:04:36AM
via Open Access. CC BY-NC-ND
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

