Nationalism and Ethnic Politics

ISSN: 1353-7113 (Print) 1557-2986 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fnep20

THE DILEMMAS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION: A
COMPARISON OF SRI LANKA AND CYPRUS
Oliver P. Richmond
To cite this article: Oliver P. Richmond (2004) THE DILEMMAS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION: A
COMPARISON OF SRI LANKA AND CYPRUS, Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, 10:2, 185-219, DOI:
10.1080/13537110490467568
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13537110490467568

Published online: 16 Aug 2010.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 189

View related articles

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fnep20
Download by: [The University of Manchester Library]

Date: 12 December 2016, At: 22:21

Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, 10:185–219, 2004
 Taylor & Francis Inc.
Copyright C
ISSN: 1353-7113 print
DOI: 10.1080/13537110490467568

THE DILEMMAS OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION: A
COMPARISON OF SRI LANKA AND CYPRUS
OLIVER P. RICHMOND
University of St. Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom

This article examines the theoretical claims made about the role of conflict resolution, especially workshop, facilitation, and project oriented approaches in the
context of the cases of Sri Lanka and Cyprus. It argues that conflict resolution
approaches, while proving to have made significant contributions to the emergence of a viable peace process on both islands, continue to present some major
dilemmas that have yet to be addressed in either context.

The application of conflict resolution oriented approaches to ethnic conflict have increasingly become part of the liberal toolbox
of the international community, partly because they allow individuals to play a role in creating a peace process, and also because
conflict resolution professes a belief in a peace based upon popular consensus and justice. This involves various attempts to create grass-roots mechanisms and processes in which conflicts can
be addressed.1 More specifically, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) are formed and funded as vehicles for conflict resolution
workshops and professional training projects that attempt to build
peace by addressing a conflict directly or indirectly through third
party facilitation. Furthermore, the use of facilitators rather than
direct mediators who focus on the development of unofficial or
semi-official “back-door” contacts are derived from this approach.
A common assumption of conflict resolution is that such processes are able to facilitate peacebuilding and the development
of high-level compromises by contributing at a semi-official and
unofficial level. Failing this, they may help prepare societies for a
liberal peace. However, the so-called “trickle up” effect on which
this assumption based is difficult to assess,2 despite the fact that
Address correspondence to Oliver P. Richmond, School of International Relations,
University of St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland KY16 9AL, UK. E-mail: opr@st-andrews.ac.uk

185

186

O. P. Richmond

conflict resolution approaches have become an important part of
national, private, and organizational responses in responding to,
and managing, intractable forms of conflict.
This article examines the patchy theoretical claims made
about the role of conflict resolution, especially workshop, facilitation, and project oriented approaches in the context of basic
assumptions about the process and its aims in the context of the
cases of Sri Lanka and Cyprus. Debates about the value and effectiveness of conflict resolution approaches shift between those
who implicitly assume that they play an important role in freeing
up high level debates through a trickle-up effect or as a complimentary approach, and those who see them as tools of “soft”
intervention aimed at importing external cultural and political
norms. This is rarely explicitly acknowledged in the literature,
however. There is little doubt that conflict resolution has become
a significant industry, as well as an approach often appropriated
by indigenous actors without resources but who desire to find a
way out of the conflict they are affected by, and on this basis find
themselves able to secure training, participation, and funding via
CR. It is also often appropriated by official actors who desire to
find a way to intervene in civil society issues. These approaches do
offer a method of intervention in civil society by external actors,
but this can then be susceptible to claims of intervention, social
engineering, and partiality. If conflict resolution debates are seen
as culturally insensitive3 why then have they become so popular
within liberal socio-political groupings and so controversial within
more conservative groups? In an inherently conservative international order, can approaches to ending conflict, including conflict
resolution, achieve little more than a contribution to the replication of that order, either by being effective in importing external
values or by not being effective and allowing a de facto situation to
continue? These important dilemmas in the use and development
of conflict resolution have so far received little attention.
The key dilemma appears to be that while such approaches
aim at a positive peace, their application may result in something
less. In order to examine these this article looks at some of the key
problems associated with the recent conflict resolution literatures.
Then it turns to a comparison of the dynamics of the conflict in
Sri Lanka and Cyprus before presenting an analysis of the use of
conflict resolution on both islands, and the problems associated

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

187

with this use. Finally, it attempts to make some sense out of the
wide-ranging claims and criticisms that exponents and opponents
of conflict resolution make. It concludes that conflict resolution
approaches, while proving since the recent hopeful developments
on both islands to have made significant contributions to the emergence of a viable peace process, continue to present some major
dilemmas that have yet to be addressed.
Conflict Resolution in Theory: Some Problems
A series of important problems can be identified in recent debates
about conflict resolution. First, at the provenance level, epistemological and ontological debates rear their heads as one tries to answer the question of what conflict resolution theory is for, and why?
Most analysts tend to assume that its role is to facilitate a broader
peace than traditional approaches give rise to, and to accept the
assumption that there is a general impulse to help the other who
is caught up in conflict. The basic premise of conflict resolution
revolves around civil society oriented activities that deconstruct
the oppositional social and psychological constructs that perpetuate conflicts within a human needs framework.4 The key methods,
those of problem-solving workshops, third party facilitation, and
increasingly, project oriented approaches, are aimed at protracted
conflicts, and involve private individuals and sometimes officials.
These individuals would then contribute to a reduction of oppositional constructs by acting upon their new-found understandings
of what causes their conflict in their social and professional roles.
Yet, it has been argued that conventional conflict resolution methods,5 such as problem solving facilitation and project-oriented
approaches, are only partially effective.
There are five prime reasons for these shortcomings according to Schehr and Milovanovic: the privileging of order,
the celebration of the ideal speech situation and consensus dynamics, the continuous encroachment of legal discourse at the
expense of alternative discourses, and, finally, the lack of connected strategies between the macro and micro domains.6 While
this contemporary critique of conflict resolution seems to be
self-evident, the growth of the area has been marked by a limited engagement with such critiques, and its institutionalization
in practice has been noticeably devoid of much reflection about

188

O. P. Richmond

its potential side effects beyond the standard facilitation and
problem-solving paradigm it engenders. Where such reflection
has crept in it has been mainly to provide effectiveness surveys
in a management style and focus on efficiency.7 Thus, the hierarchies of traditional diplomacy tend to be replicated by conflict
resolution approaches, particularly as its genesis lies in civil society
activism from which there is little short-term ability to influence
“foreign” policy during crisis periods when state or group security
issues are privileged.
The practice of conflict resolution seems to indicate some
difficult dilemmas that have not yet been thought through, with
regard to both its provenance and its processes. At the process
level these include the privileging of high-level actors, state frameworks, and order over justice, while at the same time the social
aspects of the process indicate the legitimacy of human rights, selfdetermination, and justice over state centricity and international
order. Official actors are placed on a par with the non-official
and vice versa. Around this difficult balancing act there is little
discussion of power and influence in the conflict resolution literature, mainly because this is seen to be privileging officialdom,
and “peace” is understood as a natural, socio-biological state. Yet,
even despite this absence, clearly officialdom retains its privileges
in conflict environments and often this creates obstacles for the
process of conflict resolution, or alternatively turns the process
into a “top down” effort to socially engineer conditions of “peace”
in the conflict environment by policy makers and organizers.
A further key critique of such approaches emerged in the
work of Kevin Avruch. He has argued that CR approaches downplay, misunderstand, or completely ignore the role of culture.8 CR
approaches need to develop a much more critical awareness of its
role in conflict and in dealing with conflict particularly given the
predominance of Western trained actors using such techniques in
non-Western environments. Burtonian human needs approaches
in particular present needs as generic and therefore impervious
to cultural considerations.9 On the other hand, the work of John
Paul Lederach has moved some way to recognizing the crucial
role of culture, as both an obstacle to mainstream approaches
and a possible resource for facilitators.10 Thus, Avruch argues that
“in intercultural conflict resolution a cultural analysis is an irreducible part of problem solving.”11 This recognizes that culture

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

189

is a fluid, ever-changing identity claim, discourse, and act, and
that contestation and or culture-blindness are as much a part of
conflict as territory, resources, or other more generally accepted
conflict issues. Such concerns have been heavily reflected in other
contributions to the literature on conflict resolution (notably in
Vayrynen’s critique of Burtonian human needs approaches also
for their cultural neglect). Cohen has also pointed out the limits
of certain types of discourse (focusing on language rather than
culture) in such processes and argues that variations in language
use can reflect differing assumptions about the causes and nature of conflict, as well as on the nature of peace.12 Aggestam has
pointed to the need for a “third culture of negotiation” in which
there exists “relational empathy” and an opportunity for the “reconstruction of meaning” from which diversity and “the ‘other’s’
narrative” can be accepted.13
Another significant difficulty lies in the assumed relationship
between traditional high-level approaches to ending conflict and
conflict resolution approaches. Unofficial or Track II methods that
precede the more traditional diplomatic approaches may prepare
the ground for official negotiations. Negotiations initiated at the
Track II level or channel may then be passed to an official negotiating forum. The argument that Track I and II are complementary
has been based upon the assumption that the lines between official and unofficial mediation processes have become increasingly
blurred and that conflict resolution methodologies can be applied
to official processes.14 This assumes that official process have not
taken over and colonized the unofficial level, however.
It may also be that the assumption that conflict resolution
approaches reduce ethno-nationalism and stereotyping, and that
blurring the lines between unofficial and official diplomacy will
not merely reproduce hegemonic discourses, is also incorrect. The
elevation of human security issues through conflict resolution approaches may exacerbate polarization in civil society because its
dominant groups may still focus on state security. This implies
that the ontology, epistemology, and methodology of conflict resolution and management approaches are juxtaposed, and that
contingency approaches, parallel track processes, and wider conflict transformation approaches result in the replication of zerosum discourses revolving around state security. It could well be
that the linkages between CM and CR merely mean that conflict

190

O. P. Richmond

resolution approaches become beholden to state interests, with
all of their inherent legal and structural asymmetries. This is
an important dilemma. Should conflict resolution approaches be
funded and used in conflict zones if they no longer clearly aim at
the creation of a just peace in the context of the criticism laid out
above, but instead focus more on the support of a high level peace
process aimed at the consolidation of a post-conflict status quo
rather than a viable and just peace? These problems are examined
further in the following sections analyzing two key case studies.
A Tale of Two Protracted Conflicts
Though the cases of Cyprus and Sri Lanka are not often connected in comparative studies, there are many compelling similarities both in the roots of their conflicts, and also in their dynamics and the results of attempts to manage and resolve them.
There is a strong sense of the historicity of the conflict amongst
Greeks, Turks, Turkish Cypriots, as there is between the Sinhalese
and Tamil separatists. Historical arguments are often developed
as part of a nationalist belief in irrevocable cultural differences.
These perspectives are reinforced by their various communities’
adherence to different religious beliefs (though there is far more
diversity on this issue in Sri Lanka), the use of different languages,
and the fear of the perceived irredentist desires of a hegemonic
neighbor, or social cultural alliances with other actors or groups in
the region said to be part of the same “nation.” These differences
are traced through mythical and imagined histories, perpetrated
by popular stereotypes propagated by politicians and media.
Both islands were colonized several times, finally by the
British, and received the full range of both paternal colonialism
and colonial neglect. British colonialism in particular was crucial in constructing separate ethnic identities on the islands. Both
islands hosted groups which discovered the normative power of
anti-colonialist rhetoric in an era in which both superpowers denigrated imperialism (while sometimes practicing it themselves)
and were endeavoring to rein in the effects of opening the Pandora’s box of self-determination, freed by a popularization of liberal internationalism by Woodrow Wilson at Versailles where for
the first time the US took the lead in projecting the shape of international order. In Cyprus, the Greek Cypriots were amongst

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

191

the pioneers of the use of asymmetric guerrilla warfare against a
colonial occupier whose control rested more on reputation than
physical threat (though over 30,000 British troops were used to
try to put down the rebellions between 1955 and 1958 and failed).
This sort of asymmetric warfare was not new, but increasingly became part of the armory of disaffected and marginalized actors
who had not, or could not, receive representation or legitimation within international fora, and then often spread to subgroups
which disliked post-colonial power-sharing frameworks which often led to the domination of minorities by majoritarian rule. The
abuse of majoritarianism occurred by the Greek Cypriots and by
the Sinhala majority, sparking reactions to domination by both
the Turkish Cypriots and the Tamil communities in the north and
the east of Sri Lanka.
Not least, all of these diverse groups resident on these islands
adhere to some view of the hegemonic West as an actor both to
be feared and distanced, while being courted and placated. Both
islands have been politically, socially and economically isolated. In
these cases this was partly by choice: Sri Lanka’s majority community feared India and becoming ensnared in Cold War dynamics;
the Cyprus Republic was part of the non-aligned movement, flirted
with both superpowers, but also sought to distance itself (at least
on the part of the majority community, the Greek Cypriots) from
its nearest neighbor, Turkey, while effecting an unlikely strategic
union with the cultural motherland, Greece. Both islands were
occupied several times during the colonial period, partly because
of their strategic location (Cyprus still has two sovereign British
bases on its territory—the only case of such an arrangement), and
collectively carry a memory of subjugation. Last but not least, both
territories still host secessionist communities, intent on establishing separate states. Since the troubles began in Cyprus, there has
been a UN peacekeeping force present, patrolling the demarcation line created during the conflict of summer 1974, and there
have been many attempts to mediate a solution. Sri Lanka too has
endured a “peacekeeping” force (in this case from India) and has
seen attempts at external mediation. At present, both states are involved in mediation or facilitation processes, and both states have
conducted lengthy semantic battles over the nature of mediation,
the implications of negotiating with an unrecognized partner vis-àvis sovereignty, and the acceptable level of input that a third party

192

O. P. Richmond

can make given the unrecognized nature of their adversary. Furthermore, most if not all of the interactions between the parties
concerned are colored by what Mitchell has called the “recognition game”15 which is played out within the contours of the
international system itself, between the actors which have accrued
recognition and status and those which are marginalized.
Ultimately, both post-colonial Cyprus and Sri Lanka became
laboratories in which the methodology for the experiments of
liberal internationalism, in the guise of self-government and selfdetermination, and territorial sovereignty were supplied to groups
inhabiting territories defined most recently by colonial cartographies, which then were expected to make the experiment work.
More recently they have become laboratories for the use of CR.
Both states have gained the mantle of being among the post-World
War II world’s most protracted and longest standing conflicts—
along with Sudan, the Middle East, Kashmir, Northern Ireland,
among others. In fact all of these conflicts, when examined carefully, have similar elements as outlined above. Furthermore, as I
have elaborated elsewhere, a bastardized version of sovereignty
has developed on these islands, with what were termed ethnic
minorities or communities claiming the duplicate right of selfdetermination formerly applied to the territory, to be applied to
themselves in response to the perceived unfairness of being denied
a similar right of self-determination and as a result of discriminatory policies applied by ethnic majorities.16 This has led to several
claims to sovereignty over these islands, all claiming an objective
status on the basis of international law, land rights, local legitimacy
or international consensus. This is not like the negative or quasi
sovereignty described by Clapham or Jackson, but rather is ethnic
sovereignty, in which the group begins to organize the institutions
and resources associated with territorial sovereignty rather than
accept minority status.17
In the context of these intractable dynamics, conflict resolution approaches were increasingly turned to by internationals,
and by grassroots actors on both islands. Yet conflict resolution
approaches were regarded as suspect for many years, in that they
may have created peace movements that contradicted the ethnonationalist stances of their respective administrations, or were regarded as ineffective or simply irrelevant. In the 1990s, as conflict
resolution approaches increasingly became part of the armory of

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

193

the international community and its diplomacy in conflict zones,
it made its presence felt through internationally funded activities and organizations, and also was increasingly used by foreign
diplomats on the islands.
The next section examines the implications of these dynamics
for the deployment of conflict resolution type techniques in Sri
Lanka and Cyprus.

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka
Unlike Cyprus, independence for Sri Lanka was negotiated. Initially, at least for the first decade of independence, the UNP
(United National Party) managed to balance power between its
majority Sinhala outlook and accommodation of Tamils through
positions in the cabinet and one ministerial portfolio.18 This accommodation was destroyed by an increasing focus on “Sinhalaonly” policies which became part of the much more majoritarian approach to Sri Lankan politics on the part of the SLFP
(Sri Lankan Freedom Party), which focused on redressing the
grievances of the Sinhala Buddhists. As the militancy of both Sinhala and Tamils grew in the 1970s, intercommunal violence led
to a hardening of positions and the new constitution of 1972,
which removed the island’s colonial name (Ceylon), made Sinhala the official language, and gave Buddhism heightened status.
This downgraded Hinduism and the Tamil language. The polarization this produced laid fertile ground for anti-Tamil riots in
1983, exacerbated by the Sinhala double minority complex, and
led to India’s role in backing Tamil separatism in the north during
this period. This, of course, heightened the propensity of India
to become involved, culminating in the disastrous Indian peacekeeping attempt in 1987.19 The underlying dynamic has been one
of a fear of, or pressure for, secession. As in Cyprus, the difficulty
faced by a majoritarian government trying to hold the territory
together, and operate in a problematic region, undermined the
original post-colonial state.
As with the Greek Cypriots, the Sinhalese argue that they have
a “double minority complex” despite the fact that they constitute a
significant majority on the island, though not in the region. Greek
Cypriots point to the comparatively massive Turkish population

194

O. P. Richmond

and the Sinhalinese point to the 50 million plus inhabitants of the
South Indian state of Tamil Nadu.20
As Wilson has aptly pointed out, Sri Lanka is an ‘artificial
state’ “ . . . bequeathed by decolonisers . . . the majority justifies its
exclusivism by reference to Western style ‘democracy,’” i.e. majoritarianism in terms of ethnic (religious andlinguistic) numbers.21
This is a recurring theme of the literature on Sri Lanka. Bose
has argued that the LTTE has constructed its right of separate
self-determination in the following way: ‘The Sri Lankan Tamils’
‘inalienable right to self-determination’ (equated, in true Leninist
style, withthe right to secede and form an independent state), was
based on its claimthat the Tamils constitute a “unique nation.”22
Furthermore, Bose argues that
The grafting of a Westminster-style legislative and party-political system,
itself a legacy of British colonial rule, on to the post-colonial political
order, had a crucial impact on the exacerbation of conflict between the
two major nationalities.23

Similarly in Cyprus, the establishment of a unitary state, albeit with
major constitutional concessions for the minority Turkish Cypriot
community, led rapidly to constitutional deadlock in the three
years after independence in 1960.
Comparable themes are also taken up by Spencer. He argues
that though anthropologists have long pointed out that boundaries are porous and that sovereignties overlap “the modern state
is territorially defined through ritualised boundaries which are
recognised in international law, and which can only be crossed
on the fulfilment of legally defined criteria.”24 In contrast with
Cyprus, where there was always a question about how one could
justify the colonization of a European peoples in the context of
British debates about colonialism, Spencer argues that the British
colonial authorities in Sri Lanka believed themselves to be involved in a civilizing process via bureaucratization and rationalization processes. (In Cyprus there was a marked absence of a development debate and associated policies). Part of this importation
of norms and values was contingent upon nationalism, modeled
upon events in Europe during the nineteenth and earlier part of
the twentieth century. Spencer argues, with important implications

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

195

for both cases under investigation here, that nationalism(s) arose
via an
interaction between colonisers and colonised, each with their own cultural practices, and each also acting on interests that were structured by
the overarching relations of power. Thus it was that the British set the
terms of reference by which national identity would be worked out without
anticipating the consequences.25

This is a key dynamic of both the conflict in Cyprus and that
in Sri Lanka, which led to the replication of self-determination
debates in their minority communities, and ultimately to attempts
by both to establish “shadow” secessionist states—again replicating
the state creation mechanisms established via the UN through the
use of self-determination, to facilitate decolonization after World
War II. Krishna, again writing with special reference to Sri Lanka,
refers to this dynamic as “post-colonial insecurity:”
By postcolonial anxiety, I refer to the fact that the social constructions of
past and present classes in the third world are mimetic constructions of
what has supposedly already happened elsewhere: namely, Europe or the
West. The story of what once happened in Europe constitutes the knowledge that empowers state elites as they attempt to fashion their nations in
the image of what are considered successful nation-states.26

As in Cyprus, “Postcolonial Sri Lanka reflects a tension between
the discourse of universal, equal citizenship for all within a nation and the claims of the majority community to special status.”27 As Krishna argues, “The very practices that produce the
nation are coeval with its simultaneous fragmentation or unraveling.”28 These are the dynamics that conflict management
approaches at the level of “high” diplomacy have been called
upon to deal with. Furthermore, Indian intervention in the guise
of a peacekeeping force, and a long-standing conflict between
Sri Lankan security forces and Tamil Tigers have failed to lead to
appreciable gains or trade-offs for either side.
A long-standing stalemate on the battlefield which swung
one way and then the other provided the context in which conflict resolution approaches have been used to address the roots
of the conflict. Recently, there has been a move to what is potentially the end-game for mainstream nationalist approaches to
viewing the conflict, and this eventually led to some promising

196

O. P. Richmond

developments. There have also been several major setbacks, however. Under the presidency of Chandrika Kumartunga a process of
Norwegian facilitation emerged, which, though very controversial,
made good progress after its initiation in 2000 (though it was also
responsible for much political upheaval). This was reflected in
particular in the not incident-free elections of December 2001 in
which popular demand for change was reflected in the unseating
of the PA (People’s Alliance), and the emergence of a new political
accommodation both within the Sinhala majority population and
between the Tamil and Sinhala disputants. The emergence of a
negotiating process, a ceasefire, and the opening up of the north
and east of the island to relatively normal traffic was a result of a
softening of both sides’ ethno-nationalist exclusivism and of the
facilitation efforts of Norwegian diplomats.
The development of alternative approaches to the conflict in
Sri Lanka has a fascinating provenance. In an extremely isolated regional and international environment in which there is great fear
of the regional hegemon, India, and its own Tamil community, on
the part of the Sinhala-dominated political establishment there
has been an adherence to a simple, classic, form of sovereignty—
majority rule—on behalf of both Tamil separatists and Sinhala
nationalists derived from the decolonization period’s evangelization of liberal democratic, majoritarian and territorially sovereign
systems. Sri Lanka is an example of much that could go wrong
with this framework. Yet, there are also examples of acute cultural,
linguistic, and religious pluralism and diversity in a territory also
torn apart by cultural chauvinism.
There is a highly sophisticated conflict resolution network,
in which many foreign trained Sri Lankans, spanning the full diversity of Sri Lankan society, operate with funds provided mainly
from abroad. This industry and social framework includes individuals who are young and mid-career professions, the clergy, civil
servants, as well as grassroots actors. It has links with sympathetic
politicians as well as an established voice in the media. There are
also a large number of publications, emanating from the island or
published internationally by Sri Lankan activists and academics,
which illustrate an awareness of, and engagement in, a wide range
of debates about the nature of the conflict, and furthermore a
significant contribution to the often stale and culturally enclosed
debates that circulate within Western academic circles.29

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

197

Yet the policies of a series of governments, the political opposition, and of the Tamil Tigers and their supporters appeared at
least until recently, to continue to be mired in zero-sum debates
about sovereignty, territory, and resources, and attempts to move
beyond this found little room for development (at least until the
elections of late 2001). Indeed, the then government almost fell
over this development, and then was finally ejected in a national
election in late 2001; there were wide-scale riots amongst the Sinhala community, and the Tamil Tigers launched several attacks,
including on the country’s main international airport in the summer of 2001. Top-down debates continued to predominate despite
the seemingly widespread and multi-inclusive use of conflict resolution approaches, and the prevalence of indigenous institutions
devoted to studying the conflict. Clearly, high-level political actors,
especially in the PA, saw conflict resolution and unofficial negotiations as a tool to be exploited as long as it did not jeopardize
their existing positions. This was despite the fact there was fairly
clear evidence that a “peace constituency” had formed partly as a
result of conflict resolution activities—albeit one constructed and
informed by Western understandings of conflict and its resolution.
Yet, this cannot be regarded as completely irrelevant, given that
fact that the conflict is rooted in several Western promoted institutional norms—post-colonial majoritarianism, self-determination
(albeit for territories rather than communities),30 and territorial
integrity and sovereignty. After the elections, however, it seemed
that high-level approaches and conflict resolution approaches finally had a chance to converge, creating a diplomatic peacemaking
process that was more in line with grassroots peace activities.
However, this clash between a grassroots and an official understanding of conflict resolution—a sort of cultural confusion
between the popularly defined ethnic version of peace and the
statist obsession with security and recognition—continued in the
context of the furore over the role of the Norwegian “facilitator.”
Reflecting a long-standing area of contention between Greek and
Turkish Cypriots over the nature of UN mediation, the previous
Sri Lankan government refused to describe him as a mediator, not
wishing to accord any recognition to the other side through recognizing the triangular nature of a mediation process, nor to accord
an outsider with a dynamic mediatory role (i.e. with the ability to
make proposals). When he did begin to play a more dynamic role

198

O. P. Richmond

in the summer of 2001, the government accorded him the role of
a mediator officially precisely so that they could refuse any contributions he might then make.31 After the fall of the government
in 2001 a more dynamic role was increasingly tolerated. Similarly,
with respect to the possible use of the UN as a spokesman for
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated, “We do not want ourselves
turned into another mess like Bosnia or Sierra Leone through
UN resolutions.”32 Comparatively, in Cyprus the case has been
that the Greek Cypriots have called for decisive UN mediation
(which they feel, courtesy of UN resolutions, would favor them)
while the Turkish Cypriots have sought to reduce the UN’s role to
merely procedural facilitation.33 Thus, even the supposedly nonthreatening intervention of a facilitator was fraught with difficulties, though once these were overcome a positive version of peace
as an outcome of the conflict on Sri Lanka appeared to become
more plausible because dynamics related to security, representation, and recognition could more plausibly be addressed.
In this context, conflict resolution-based approaches, both
indigenous and external, have sprung up in an attempt to facilitate development of more harmonious understandings of the
other and their political and identity needs, and also to open a
pathway in which the state can be reassembled in a new constitutional form. This reassembly is a basic assumption of such approaches, endorsed by the fact that multi-ethnic and plural states
have become the liberal norm. The case of Norwegian facilitation
is pertinent here (referred to above), to examine the problems
that face back-door channels and conflict resolution processes. As
Bullion has pointed out, the Sri Lankan government’s efforts to
exploit Norwegian facilitation have brought to the fore a number
of key dynamics and obstacles in efforts to resolve or even manage
the dynamics of post-colonial conflict. The previous Sri Lankan
government stated the following about the role of such
approaches:
We favour the concept of third party involvement rather than adopting the
defined roles of facilitation and mediation . . . Playing the role of neutral
advisor and observer in our case, the Norwegians can continue to involve
themselves in the negotiating process, prevent misunderstanding between
the protagonists and to help to promote the forward movement of the
dialogue without imposing “judgmental decisions.”34

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

199

We had in mind the fact Norway is a small country and, therefore, a
country which we thought has no agenda of its own.35

Though there has not been any clear attempt to open “backchannels” in the Cyprus case there has been a very similar debate to this between the opposing Cypriot leaders over the role
of UN third-party mediation. Essentially, what this debate revolves
around is the opening up of a process of third-party mediation
in a situation of a hurting stalemate. However, the stalemate in
both cases has not been judged sufficiently painful to require decisive intervention. What has transpired in both cases is that one
or other party has sought a third-party role which is not decisive,
judgmental, and does not impose external norms in the process of
mediation and negotiation, nor effectively into any solution that
might emerge from this process. Essentially, this has led in both
cases to the development of what I have called elsewhere “devious objectives” in which the disputants defy the Western norm of
compromise through mediation, negotiation or facilitation, but
use the process itself to maneuver for resources which strengthen
its position.36 Even UN involvement has been rejected by the government side.37
Conflict resolution processes on the island seem to be run
mainly as didactic workshop sessions and lectures in which eminent members of the establishment, including teachers, municipal officials, local politicians, clergy, lawyers, and other professions, are brought together to present sympathetic views on a
particular, pluralist version of what peace would mean for target audiences. For example, one such session involved a mayor,
several Buddhist monks, a lawyer, a headmaster, as well as local
politicians literally lecturing at a school in the Kandy district in
the school assembly hall for several hours on how they believed
“peace” could be achieved. This event took place out of school
hours in a market town between Colombo and Kandy, a town that
had recently suffered intercommunal rioting in which the Muslim
commercial community had been targeted. The school itself was
ethnically and religiously mixed (though it seemed to be gender
segregated) and the opportunity was taken by the organizers to
underline some basic discrepancies in the relationships between
Sinhala and Tamil communities.38 A basic lecture on conflict resolution was supplied by a member of an NGO based in Colombo,

200

O. P. Richmond

mainly focusing on coexistence strategies. Attendees included prefects and advanced students, and perhaps the most interesting approach was taken by a Buddhist monk who gave an interpretation
of peace in Buddhist philosophy directed at the majority group
in the audience of Buddhist Sinhalese. This was particularly interesting, bearing in mind the fact that the clergy in Sri Lanka
had attempted to replace their lost influence with the advent of
the modern secular nation state by adopting majoritarian nationalism, which had been successful in retaining their influence and
privileges. Peace was described as intercommunal harmony. Local
MPs from various political parties also gave their interpretation.
During the course of the session, in which the language used was
mainly Sinhala, it became clear that though Tamil students spoke
Sinhala, Sinhalase students did not speak Tamil, a fact which was
made much of by the school’s headmaster (this is very similar to
the linguistic politics relating to the use of Greek and Turkish in
Cyprus, where Turkish Cypriots speak Greek but not vice versa).
There was a very clear attempt to provide a culturally-specific discourse of peace, though there was also a consensus that the liberal
West provided a model to be aspired to.39
A seminal moment in the role of civil society in the peace
process occurred in 1994 when a large media campaign against
election violence struck a chord with large sections of the electorate, many of whom were to later form what has been identified
as a peace constituency.40 This opened up the possibility of creating a peace movement involving civil society, as since the 1950s
all attempts at negotiation had occurred on high-level platforms
controlled by government. The National Peace Council (which
had organized the above-mentioned workshop), an example of
this sort of organization, provides a platform for a wide range of
ethnic and religious sectors of civil society. Indeed, the organization of the NPC was based upon a detailed academic knowledge of conflict resolution debates at a level rarely encountered
by this author in the Cyprus context. This organization applies
Lederach’s pyramid model41 developing the strategies of research,
training, dialogue, and process in order to bring disputants together and to bring the government to the realization that they
must address the aspirations of the peoples. Amongst the research
that was being carried out were reports on the cost of the war in
economic and social terms, public opinion surveys, and advocacy

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

201

media campaigns. Training revolved mainly around conflict resolution projects on listening and communication, and dealing with
interpretations of history. They had also run projects involving
significant numbers of MPs, and for this project had received messages of support from the President, the LTTE, and the leader
of the opposition. Indeed, after government forces lost Elephant
Pass in 2000, the government had approached the NPC and asked
it to contact the LTTE, seeing it as a plausible method of making
contact with a non-state actor without violating its own stance on
sovereignty. Thus, the NPC has made an effort to develop projects
at different levels of the social and political strata. Much of the
funding for this particular organization came from regional development funds, and later from International Alert, USAID, and
NORAD. Other sources have included the Dutch government and
the British High Commission. Interestingly, a Canadian funding
source was rejected several years ago because the funders wanted
too much input, requiring the NPC to forge alliances with other
NGOs. This was unacceptable to the NPC because of ideological
differences, indicating the potential for the politicization of the
funding process and relationship.
Despite the fact that NPC often draws on Western sources of
funding and is well-versed in the debates derived from Western literature about conflict resolution, it is clear that such approaches
do not really translate well in the Sri Lankan context. The sites
of power identified in the Western literature lie at the official
political level and within civil society, and depend upon flexible
relationships between the levels, and on civil societies’ realization
of its politicized nature. Yet the actual sites of power, politicization of civil society, communication processes between politicians
and active members of society, and the actors (in this case such
as the Buddhist clergy) who filter such communication, vary from
case to case. Indeed, one particular interviewee argued that the
Westphalian states-system had been transplanted into Sri Lanka
without the social development and conditions that had occurred
in the West. Thus the state became an instrument for control and
advancement of a semi-feudal elite. There had been no secularization process, no free market, and “rulers” were elected, not leaders.
Given this type of analytical stance, it came as no surprise that this
organization was running a core group discussion in which several
MPs discussed the problem of sovereignty, the role of mediation

202

O. P. Richmond

between a sovereign and non-sovereign actor (asymmetric negotiations in other words), and the need for a “rethink of the nation
state” in the context of a contradictory and heightened ethnic consciousness. This illustrates the potential for a cross-over between
official and unofficial approaches in practice.
Another important organization is ICES (International Centre for Ethnic Studies) of which there are two distinctive branches,
one in Colombo with more of a conflict resolutionist approach,
and one in Kandy with a determined conflict management approach (described as a more “academic” approach).42 The name
of this organization implies the elevation of ethnic identity as
a focus for understanding the conflict. Again a number of different projects were underway, one on tolerance in border villages, another on women and violence.43 The Director of ICES
(Colombo) intimated that there was a certain tension between the
two branches and argued that part of the problem they both faced
was that funding for their activities was increasingly becoming results oriented, which reflected the difference in their approach,
one being more practically oriented rather than academic. Funders such as the Ford Foundation, Norad, Canadian, and Swiss
sources were intent on gaining a return on their “investments,”
by focusing on activities that showed concrete results, often at
the expense of high quality academic research. The branch in
Kandy had built up a network of scholars in South Asia which
was exploited in terms of publications and conferences. The Director’s view (Kandy branch) was that peacebuilding had proven
ineffective in Sri Lanka, and more generally in South Asia, its
main weakness being the lack of credible guarantees between opposing parties without the presence of military force. The role of
explicit mediation, he argued, had been discredited by the role of
India, and of course, by its use of force in 1987.44 This is why the
Norwegian mediation process had opted for the denomination
of ‘facilitator,’ and also why the government expected it to play a
purely procedural role. Given views such as this, it is no surprise
that they were associated with a strictly territorial understanding
of the sovereignty of the state of Sri Lanka. This reasoning was part
of an elaborate numerical and demographic breakdown offered,
which was used in this case to undermine the territorial claims
of the LTTE, who at that point were arguing that their security
demands could only be fully met if the north and east of the island

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

203

secede. The LTTE understanding of “peace,” he argued, was based
on absolute control of territory, whereas the Sri Lankan government’s position was based upon an extension of the rule of law
from government-controlled areas. Compounding the problem
was the fact that he believed that the West was unaware of the nature of the claims of the LTTE as a representative of a minority.45
Other criticisms of CR were also encountered, especially of
those involved and the wider interests that might motivate such
intervention. As there was no discussion of the sovereignty issue
until the recent rapprochement, the role of third parties in CR
was sometimes criticized as validating the claims of non-sovereign
actors by placing them on an equal footing as state representatives.
Similarly, as outlined above, the role of Norwegian facilitation also
carried problems associated with recognition of the LTTE. Cyprus
has also been used as a negative example of all of the reasons why
foreign intervention is not required, because it might legitimize
the de facto situation.46
The interconnection between conflict resolution and highlevel approaches has been widely publicized by the NGO sector.
For example, Jehan Perera, Director of the National Peace Council, argues that,
political leaders cannot implement a peace agreement that is not supported
by the general population or influential groups in civil society. Sometimes
they cannot even begin to negotiate a peace agreement unless there is
popular support for it and a build-up of popular expectations concerning
the need for them.47

This has proven to be the case, in that in the elections held in
2001 the UNP won mainly because it had much better access to
the LTTE areas and because Ranil Wickremesinghe had spoken
of devolution for the LTTE areas while preserving the territorial
integrity of the state—something which clearly struck a chord in
the electorate. Interestingly, the subsequent attempts to broker an
agreement partly stemmed from a growing belief that the failures
of the economy are linked to the cost of the war,48 despite a government “prosperity program” used to gain allegiance (aid was
being sent to almost 60 percent of households by this point). After
the elections in 2001 things began to move very quickly, leading to
negotiations facilitated by Norwegian diplomats and officials on

204

O. P. Richmond

a memorandum of understanding which would consolidate the
ceasefire and set up human rights protection mechanisms. However, the Memorandum of Understanding that emerged quickly
out of the restart of negotiations between the LTTE and the new
government in early 2002 was arrived at with no input from the
former government and new opposition (of which the President
was also a member).
Debates about a third-party role in this new phase of the
peace process initially focused upon the rather arcane discussion
about whether the Norwegian third party, Eric Solheim, was a
mediator or facilitator. This can be put down to the sensitivities
of the Sri Lankan government about intervention. Solhiem was
seen as sympathetic to the Tamils and very soon stepped over
the lines of facilitation. The Norwegian peace mission tried to
incorporate the discourse of human security into a peace process,
though its role is based upon facilitation and the model that led
to the now failed Oslo Accords.49 The tactic was to introduce
the concept of human rights into the discourse by persuading
the government to drop its embargo on the LTTE-controlled
areas. However, the process is seriously complicated by the fact
that the Tamil side want to be regarded as equals to government
negotiators (made more difficult by the fact that post September
11, 2001, the LTTE became increasingly susceptible to international proscription). However, given the change of government
and the new government’s attitude to a solution, the Norwegian
facilitation that had already taken place then provided a model
for the attainment of a solution after the election. Indeed, the
Norwegians were also then asked to play a role in monitoring the
ceasefire. Their role rapidly grew from facilitation to more direct
involvement in the political and military aspects of stabilization
and finding a solution. President Kumaratunga argued that this
role was incompatible with the sovereignty of the state.50 Certainly
this was true, but popular feeling seemed to have drawn the
conclusion that a sovereignty which could not be enforced might
not be worth fighting for, and the focus had shifted to consensus
building for a new form of sovereign arrangement.
Despite this, the President intervened in the peace process
in late 2003 in order to prevent what she saw to be the danger
of giving away too much to the LTTE. In what was basically a
strategic overthrow of the government, she sacked three ministers,

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

205

suspended parliament and sent troops onto the streets, arguing
that the government had made too many concessions to the
LTTE.51 Essentially, she took control of the peace process and
declared a state of emergency in what was seen as a reversion to
a more traditionalist nationalist strategy and an attempt to bypass
the “peace constituency” that had emerged in the parliament,
government, and populace. How far this peace constituency has
contributed to the freeing up of generally intractable government
and opposition posturing and high-level discourses about the conflict is open to debate, however. The elections in December 2001
did result in a heightened anticipation that an agreement could
be reached,52 despite the fact that Tamils from the disputed zones
were prevented from voting. The LTTE demanded that the ban it
was under be lifted before it took part in the Norwegian-brokered
talks, though both sides declared ceasefires and the government
lifted its economic embargo on the LTTE controlled areas. This
seems to have sounded the end of the “war for peace” approach of
the previous government, and indeed the LTTE leader, Velupillai
Prabhakaran, emerged from hiding to intimate that the claim
for a separate state might be dropped.53 Yet, the recent activities
of the Sri Lankan President seem to have undermined some of
the ground gained by the more flexible approach to the peace
process adopted after the election in late 2001 by the government
and the LTTE.
Clearly, in the case of Sri Lanka, conflict resolution approaches have aimed at the accommodation of both disputants’
legitimate interests, and despite difficulties related to its cultural
derivation and the cultural dissonances of funders and organizers
alike, paucity of funds, and its relatively small scope, such
activities have been very important in keeping any sort of peace
process alive while high level politics, nationalism, and militarism
exhausted themselves.
Conflict Resolution in Cyprus
The dynamics of the conflict in Cyprus fit very closely to Azar’s
model for protracted social conflict. The conflict is clearly located
on the fault-line of territorial sovereignty and self-determination,
with important regional and local dynamics which are interrelated. It touches also upon issues related to international

206

O. P. Richmond

security, minorities and majoritarianism, history, culture and identity, economic differentials and social status. The conflict has undergone many permutations, but its most recent form revolves
around the Turkish Cypriot claim for separate sovereignty after
the 1974 Turkish invasion on the basis of a need for security
against Greek and Greek Cypriot extremism, and Greek Cypriot
claims for a unitary or federal state that would enable refugees
to return. Soon after independence in 1960, the constitutional
safeguards for the Turkish Cypriot community (partly installed
to prevent Turkey from making a claim against Cyprus) began
to be undermined by Greek Cypriot nationalists. This led to a
breakdown of the constitution in 1963, UN intervention, and an
11-year stalemate over constitutional reforms. In 1974, the mainland Greek military Junta launched a right-wing coup against the
island’s President. This allowed Turkey to intervene and create a
homogenous territorial zone for the beleaguered Turkish Cypriot
community, which effectively partitioned the island. When negotiations restarted, agreements were reached by 1977 to negotiate
distinct territorial ethnic zones in a federal constitution. However,
since then the Turkish Cypriot side has made a claim for separate
sovereignty, something that the Greek Cypriot side is determined
to prevent. This has meant that there was little contact between the
two communities after 1974 until the Turkish Cypriot side opened
up the “green line” in 2003, and no progress in negotiations since
1977. Recently, the internationally recognized Republic of Cyprus
controlled by the Greek Cypriot government has made a successful
application for EU accession, which initially heightened tension
with Turkey and the Turkish Cypriots for a number of reasons.
UN peacekeepers have been present on the island since March
1964, and though they were not mandated to intervene in the
war of 1974, they have successfully patrolled the ceasefire and fulfilled the role of providing a relatively stable environment in which
peacemaking can occur. However, the UN force has become part
of the conflict landscape in Cyprus and there has been dissatisfaction with the comfortable status quo it has helped provide, which
some have argued has hindered the conflict’s resolution. Recently,
a breakthrough seemed possible on the basis of a new UN plan.
Since a referendum on the ‘Annan Plan’ in April 2004 failed, the
island has joined the EU but a solution still seems remote and the
status of the Turkish Cypriot community is still unresolved.

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

207

Conflict resolution workshops bringing together both communities have taken place since the late 1960s with negligible general effects upon the two communities’ ethno-national
stereotyping or official negotiating positions. Furthermore, because of both sides’ sensitivities over third-party intervention,
mediation has generally been limited to quiet diplomacy and good
offices, which approximate a facilitative role rather than direct mediation. In addition, as a result of the establishment and training
of sympathetic citizens by Western trained foreign exponents of
conflict resolution, and, initially at least, a small number of local sympathizers, there is a solid core of civil society activists and
sympathizers. However, there have also been many problems, not
least with the official position of both Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot administrations that indicates, if not antipathy, then certainly a level of suspicion. As with Sri Lanka, Cyprus has been used
as a laboratory in which such approaches have been developed
and tested, and their wider impact, though very difficult to assess,
seems to have been limited. As in Sri Lanka, political progress has
tended to depend on nationalist constituencies and their leaders, limited by the constraints that official state-nationalism and
ethno-nationalism have set. These debates are socially enforced
by professional and social codes, both in Sri Lanka and Cyprus,
which tend to act as significant constraints on the activities and impact of those who sympathize with the aims of the various conflict
resolution programs and activities. Both discourses tend to delineate different axes on the political agenda, and appear to be highly
resource dependent, particularly in terms of the fairly constant cultural terms of reference all disputants tend to reify the other with.
The role of PRIO (International Peace Research Institute,
Oslo) provides an interesting insight into conflict resolution in
Cyprus. PRIO has also been involved in regional aspects of the
conflict, working on “Human Rights and Peace in Turkey and the
Eastern Mediterranean” as well as being involved in the GreeceTurkey forum in association with RUSI (Royal United Services
Institute, London).54 Its role in Cyprus is derived from Richard
Holbrooke’s business community ideas, in which he tried to
establish lines of communication and cooperation for business
leaders in both communities in order to facilitate normalization.
Holbrooke approached the then Norwegian State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs to establish a joint project in Cyprus in 1997.55 This

208

O. P. Richmond

was based upon a Greek-Turkish Forum that had been established
and run by RUSI and endeavored to bring together business, military and political leaders to facilitate an improvement in GreekTurkish relations by developing contacts between them. PRIO used
pragmatic methods to approach business people, of which 25–30
were involved. The brief from the Norwegian government was
broad and, in terms of funding, open-ended, forming part of the
Norwegian tradition of civil society building for which large sums
of money had been allocated via NORAD for NGOs and their
roles in peacebuilding and conflict resolution (as is also reflected
in Sri Lanka).
The Director of the PRIO project in Cyprus argued that Cypriots found conflict resolution methods restrictive and condescending in that they often expressed the fear that they were being told
what to do and what to think. He argued that the process has created important bonds between businessmen, but that the contacts
have been subjected to such heavy politicization that any benefits
had been blocked. Furthermore, the Turkish Cypriot leadership’s
attitude to conflict resolution is somewhat hostile, and there also
seemed to be some efforts to exert control on Greek Cypriots
partaking—particularly those who were civil servants.56 Turkish
Cypriot nationalists seem mainly to see conflict resolution as irrelevant to a process which lay ultimately not in the hands of civil
society but more in the hands of the main political leaders from
the north and from Turkey. The PRIO director also argued that
the US Fulbright to CR approach emphasized sameness through
conflict resolution rather than understanding differences, which
was more in line with PRIO’s approach. He expressed uneasiness
at the claim that Greek Cypriot nationalists have often made that
conflict resolution processes are endeavoring to legitimize ethnic cleansing in Cyprus through their focus on a bizonal solution
rather than a return to the 1960 constitutional arrangements.
A second organization involved in CR in Cyprus is the Bicommunal Trainers Group, established locally in 1994, which has
been partnered with similar groups in Israel as well as organizations in the US, using a mixture of approaches, ranging from principled negotiation to psychological empowerment and spiritual
approaches. This organization has purposefully avoided taking on
an official status in order to have more freedom to negotiate the
problem of the relative status of the two communities.57 It was

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

209

initiated by individuals within civil society and has been funded
by USAID through the Fulbright organization, which turned to
conflict resolution funding after the immediate post-war humanitarian needs had been met.
The role of the US Fulbright organization in Cyprus merits
further attention.58 The Fulbright has been involved in distributing funding for Cypriots from all communities to study in the US
since 1961, and after the conflicts during the period 1963–74, was
able to continue to work in both communities because of this.
Indeed, the Fulbright has often been the only organization that
was able to work in the north even when other organizations had
been prevented from gaining access because of the Turkish Cypriot
leadership’s opposition to conflict resolution processes. This has
mainly been because of the funding the Fulbright distributes
to Turkish Cypriot students. It has regularly provided around
$10 million per year for bicommunal work in Cyprus through
USAID in a highly structured, rather than ad hoc, operation.59
This enabled the Fulbright, with the support of its Greek Cypriot
director, to become involved in conflict resolution, exploiting links
with academics at US institutions which were interested in developing their approaches and contributing to a Cyprus solution.
Though this carried the problematic dynamic of using Cyprus as
a “guinea pig” for experimentation, it has been clear that both
participants, trainers, and funders have generally not seen this as
a serious problem (with perhaps some exceptions on the part of
the funders). The genesis of this cross-over from educational assistance to conflict resolution funding developed from a meeting
in 1993 between local Fulbright graduates from both communities. From these small beginnings, 15 workshops mainly run by US
scholars and exponents of conflict resolution have developed. In
2000, the funding for conflict resolution was reallocated to the US
embassy in Cyprus, prompting criticism that this would politicize
an already fragile process, and also that the US embassy wanted
control of the process. This occurred after a number of criticisms
had been made about the ineffectiveness of the process, and possible favoritism in the allocation of funds for conflict resolution.
However, much of the “peace constituency” that currently exists
in Cyprus is as a result of the pioneering work of the Fulbright
in this field, which has managed to bring several hundred people
into such contacts. Though there has been much opposition, such

210

O. P. Richmond

debates have become part of the public consciousness and have
played a role in developing an awareness that there may be alternative paths out of the conflict, though there is no empirical evidence
to show that such processes have had a direct impact on developments in the official negotiation process.60 Indeed any developments that may have occurred have mainly been because of structural changes in the regional or international environment such as
the rise and wane of the Cold War, the application of the Republic
to join the EU and impending accession of the island in May 2004,
or US and European financial or strategic pressure on Turkey.
This has been the reasoning mainly employed in policy circles,
which have focused increasingly on the need for a conflict resolution type contribution to high level diplomacy rather than merely
on CR’s social intervention. US embassy officials in Nicosia tend to
present a certain pessimism about the ability of conflict resolution
processes to make an overall contribution to elite level negotiations, and furthermore a perception of a need for diplomats to
take firm control of conflict resolution in order to help develop a
clearer link between the two activities to make it more “effective.”61
From these discussions it emerged that the money allocated by the
US congress (about $15 million per annum) for bicommunal work
and to UNDP ($10 million) was actually supposed to function in
terms of providing support for Track I processes. Much of the
impetus from the provision of this money comes from the manner in which the Greek-American lobby has been able to express
itself in terms of the liberal goals of conflict resolution in the region vis-à-vis US foreign policy. While higher level actors saw this
US position as problematic, it was popular at lower levels particularly because the bicommunal activities had shifted from standard
conflict resolution work to professional training activities which,
incidentally, were also bicommunal. The US embassy’s official position is clearly that there should be a definite linkage between
Track I and Track II processes—hence the embassy’s move to take
control of the allocated funding in order to develop this linkage
further. Their priority was clearly the Track I process, however.
Indeed the criticism has been made that the Fulbright organization had not tried to develop the capacity of conflict resolution
as a tool and had constantly retrained the same participants. Indeed, a common view is that conflict resolution has run its course
and the key contribution it can now make is in the more indirect

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

211

form of professional training, which has included such projects
as “earthquake response training.” Much of the same methodology still applies, however, in that such projects focus on younger
professionals from both communities. Accordingly, the failure of
this mechanism could be ascribed to the failure of selection and
the planting of “spoilers” in the groups that undergo professional
training. This seems to indicate the fact that conflict resolution
is seen as a tool of social engineering, in order to instill certain
norms exported from the higher reaches of the international hierarchy of states—with powerful, peaceful states playing the liberal
and somewhat neo-colonial role of normalizing deviant communities. Interestingly, it was also argued that US-sponsored conflict
resolution processes could not promote the role of the EU because
Congress aimed at promoting US values and business contacts.
There are a variety of views within both communities and
amongst politicians, reflecting the belief that grassroots conflict
resolution activities are crucial or can contribute to an overall settlement by preparing the ground, to the belief that they cannot
produce any political result62 or constitute a betrayal of ethnonationalist views.63 Reflecting views amongst activists involved in
the conflict resolution movement in Cyprus is the argument that
such processes should be run by indigenous grass-roots actors and
that there were no conflicts of interest created by outside training,
trainers, or funding, that there should be more linkage with high
politics and that officials should also be trained in conflict resolution practices.64 Prevalent amongst the Turkish Cypriot leadership
is the view that conflict resolution processes have no impact upon
politics and high-level negotiations,65 though their actions in occasionally closing the border to prevent conflict resolution meetings
seem to indicate some fear that there may be an impact after all.
Nationalist sectors of the media have been particularly critical of
conflict resolution processes in both communities, accusing the
participants of being traitors, picked by the US in particular (or
other liberal states) for their role, and betraying their own community. Other claims, more often from the Turkish Cypriot community, focus on the irrelevance of such processes.66 Denktash
himself has argued that bicommunal processes are endeavoring
to “brainwash” and bribe Turkish Cypriots, and are being used
to “stir up trouble.”67 This is indicative of the fact that they do
have an impact in potentially delegitimizing ethno-nationalist and

212

O. P. Richmond

exclusionary debates in societies where mainstream positions depend upon their sustenance.
As in Sri Lanka conflict resolution faces the difficult issues
of recognition and multiple claims over territorial sovereignty.
Furthermore, some of its principle funders and organizers have
demonstrated a frustration with the lack of visible results their investment has shown over time. Despite the seeming intractability
of such issues, conflict resolution in Cyprus has found and consolidated a group of people who value “resolution” more than the
supposed losses that a solution would bring to both sides. This
has been very important in creating legitimacy for a discourse of
peace based upon accommodation rather than ethno-nationalism.
This can clearly be seen during the incident-free period since the
green line was opened up in 2003 with Cypriots now able to have
relatively unhindered contacts.
Conclusion
Ultimately, as the above discussion of conflict resolution in Cyprus
and Sri Lanka has endeavored to suggest that conflict resolution
has the following main roles: (1) to provide an innovative, liberal
but often acultural social forum for exchange to undercut ethnonationalism; (2) to complement high level approaches such as
mediation and peacekeeping; (3) to normalize problem states by
exporting a package of communicational values drawn directly
from the Western socio-political experience, mainly by empowering grassroots and civil society to have more say over the actions
of their elites, rather than vice versa.
In both Cyprus and Sri Lanka, there are two very politicized
approaches to conflict resolution processes; grass roots actors
and officials both held similar views in similar proportion, along
the lines of the following. Many believed that the kind of skills
and contacts gained from the process were highly important in
creating the conditions for a future peace. These people did
not tend to question the motives of the organizers, trainers, or
funders, and discounted any importance here, generally arguing
that that contacts that were being provided were more significant.
The other approach was one of deep skepticism in which either
the application of these approaches undermined the unity of
each side, its objectives, and even worse threatened to make

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

213

past sacrifices meaningless by legitimizing the objectives of the
other. From this perspective, the motives of the interveners were
seen to be self-interested. Some argued that this was an example
of social engineering, undermining the cultural foundations
of their society. Others argued more simply that the types of
people and socio-political strata involved could not hope to have
an impact on the problem. This raises the broader question of
what the objectives of conflict resolution should be—whether to
contribute to an overall settlement or to allow citizens to explore
their situation vis-à-vis the other. Both views were expressed in
the samples I examined, though I found much less liberal views
in the policy community, spread amongst those who believe
conflict resolution’s objectives are to persuade the other side
of the righteousness of their positions, and those who feared its
encouragement of a “radical” fringe.
In both cases, the establishment of a unitary state, albeit
with major constitutional concessions for the minority community,
led rapidly to constitutional deadlock in the years after independence. This is a key dynamic of both the conflict in Cyprus and in
Sri Lanka, which led to the replication of self-determination debates in their minority communities, and which ultimately led to
attempts by both to establish “shadow” secessionist states—again
replicating the state-creation mechanisms established via the UN
to facilitate decolonization after World War II. Both conflicts reflect a tension between equal citizenship within a state and majoritarian claims. This causes the majoritarian post-colonial elites,
summarily appointed through negotiations with the former colonial power, to lead to destabilizing relationships between ethnic
groups and with regional neighbors, as well as promoting a discourse of majoritarian versus ethnic justice and recognition in
the international community, often played out in the forum of
the UN General Assembly—as was particularly the case in Cyprus.
This raises the question of what can be done in the face of conflicting claims to self-determination. In both cases, which have seen
significant change and accommodation recently, it seems that conflict resolution processes are suited to opening up debates about
self-determination in a context beyond that provided by standard
majoritarian political debates, though CR also finds it very difficult to resist the powerful rationalism and resources inherent in
the latter. Since the ceasefire in Sri Lanka and the opening of

214

O. P. Richmond

the green-line in Cyprus, it has become clear how important the
conflict resolution processes that took place before these events
actually were in pioneering social contact between two divided
populations. This effectively prepared some ground for the opening up of contacts on a broader basis between the communities
on both islands.
However, clearly there are social and cultural obstacles as
well as political obstacles to the achievement of CR; these obstacles have led to a funding squeeze and an experimentation with
professional training also following Western models in order to deliver more concrete results. This seems to overlook the claim that
CR makes to the development of longer term peace constituency
(born out to a certain extent by recent events on both islands),
the development of which can clearly be charted in both Cyprus
and Sri Lanka—though its specific contribution to the emerging
settlement processes on both islands would be very hard to define
or quantify. These findings are important because they indicate
that around the methodology and processes that exist in conflict
environments where there are long-term conflict resolution processes, a community has indeed grown up. A debate exists between
those who support the processes and rejectionists, and in some way
this encourages a broader discussion at the policy level and also a
deeper discussion in some sectors of the grassroots level. Precisely
how this dynamic operates has yet to be examined.
Out of this study arise some propositions about the role of
CR in Sri Lanka and Cyprus: that contact with the other is a popular and worthwhile end in itself and is understood to be so by
policymakers without necessarily producing a settlement in the
short term; that civil societies’ desire for contact with the other
gives rise to such fora and processes autonomously. Furthermore,
conflict resolution arises as a response to a failure of traditional
high-level diplomatic efforts but also is envisaged as having a complementary role, at least by policymakers. It is seen as a balance for
state-centric methods of conflict management that further legitimizes the role and power of officials at the grassroots level, and by
doing so democratizes the process of making of peace. Given that
most funding comes via major liberal Western states, conflict resolution is also perceived as a backdoor way to peace (shaped by the
understanding of “peace” of dominant states) by those states that
wish to expand their hegemonic influence and require legitimate

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

215

access to civil society. However, local and international consensus
for the use of CR seems to have been undermined to some extent
by a paucity of funds in Sri Lanka, and by a shift towards resultsbased professional training approaches in Cyprus. In both cases, it
seems, the dilemma remains that CR is seen more as a tool of political and social engineering by liberal minded, Western trained
actors. Yet those actors (and principally funders) are motivated
by a need for quick and visible results and thus are afflicted by a
short-termism that threatens to undermine the original purpose
of conflict resolution approaches.
Acknowledgements
This article is based upon fieldwork conducted from 2000–2002
funded by the Carnegie Trust and the University of St Andrews.
I would like to thank all those who helped during my fieldwork
on both islands. I would also like to thank Alan Bullion for his
expert assistance on the Sri Lanka case. Finally, thanks to the
anonymous reviewers for Nationalism and Ethnic Politics. I take
sole responsibility for any errors herein.
Notes
1. I use conflict resolution here to denote non-official forms of mediation—
facilitation and project oriented approaches to responding to conflict.
2. See Oliver P. Richmond, “Rethinking Conflict Resolution: The Linkage Problematic Between ‘Track I’ and ‘Track II,’” The Journal of Conflict Studies,
Vol. 22, No. 2, 2001.
3. For an excellent discussion of the various aspects and implications of this
debate, see Tarja Varynen, Culture and Conflict Resolution (Manchester University Press, 2001). See also Diane Francis, People, Peace and Power (London:
Pluto, 2002), esp. p. 140.
4. As Varynen has pointed out, this notion of rethinking conflict in such a
way is somewhat contradictory as the human needs framework provides an
implicitly acultural and possibly totalizing universe. Varynen, pp. 2–7.
5. For more on this see, for example, J. Burton, Conflict Resolution and Provention (London: Macmillan, 1992); Herbert Kelman, “Social-Psychological
Dimensions of International Conflict,” in William Zartman and Lewis
Rasmussen (eds.), Peacemaking in International Conflict: Methods and Techniques
(Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press, 1997), p. 195.
6. Robert C. Schehr and Dragan Milovanovic, “Conflict Mediation and Postmodern: Chaos, Catastrophe, and Psychoanalytic Semiotics,” Social Justice,
Vol. 26, No. 11, Spring 1999, p. 208.

216

O. P. Richmond

7. See for example, a report on the CR work of the Fulbright in Cyprus. Marion
Peters Angelica, Conflict Resolution Training in Cyprus: An Assessment, unpublished report, July 1999. .
8. Kevin Avruch, Culture and Conflict Resolution (Washington: USIP, 1998),
part I.
9. Ibid., pp. 83–90.
10. Cited in Ibid., p. 92 and p. 97.
11. Ibid., p. 98.
12. Raymond Cohen, “Language and Conflict Resolution: The limits of English,”
International Studies Quarterly, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2001, p. 27.
13. Karin Aggestam, “Identity and Conflict Resolution: The Construction of
a Third Culture of Negotiation,” Fourth ECPR, 8–10 September, 2001,
pp. 11–3.
14. See, for example, Louis Kriesburg, “Varieties of Mediating Activities and
Mediators in International Relations,” in J. Bercovitch (ed.), Resolving International Conflicts: The Theory and Practice of Mediation (London: Boulder,
1996), p. 226.
15. C. Mitchell, “External Peacemaking Initiatives and International Conflict,”
in Manus Midlarsky (ed.), The Internationalisation of Communal Strife (London
and New York: Routledge, 1992), p. 277.
16. See Oliver P. Richmond, “States of Sovereignty, Sovereign States, and Ethnic
Claims for International Status,” Review of International Studies, Vol. 28, No. 2,
2002. See also, Shashi Tharoor, “The Messy Afterlife of Colonialism,” Global
Governance, Vol. 8, 2002, pp. 1–5; Eghosa E. Osaghae, “The Role and Function
of Research in Divided Societies: The Case of Africa,” in Marie Smyth and
Gillian Robinson, Researching Violently Divided Societies (UNU/Pluto Press,
2001), p. 18.
17. See Christopher Clapham, “Degrees of Statehood,” in Review of International
Studies, Vol. 24 (1998). See also Robert H. Jackson, Quasi-states: Sovereignty
International Relations and the Third World (Cambridge: CUP, 1990), p. 150.
18. Alan Bullion, “Civil Conflict in Sri Lanka—Problems of Consolidation and
Prospects for Peace,” Unpublished paper, 2002, p. 2.
19. Ibid. For an excellent analysis of this see Alan Bullion, India, Sri Lanka, and
the Tamil Crisis 1976–1994 (Pinter, 1995).
20. A. Jeyaratnam Wilson, Sri Lankan Tamil Nationalism (London: Hurst, 2000),
p. 136.
21. Ibid., pp. 136–7.
22. Sumantra Bose, States, Nations, Sovereignty Sri Lanka, India and the Tamil Eelam
Movement (Sage, 1994), p. 14.
23. Ibid., p. 28.
24. Benedict Anderson, cited by Jonathan Spencer (ed.), Sri Lanka: History and
the Roots of Conflict (Routledge, 1990), pp. 25–7.
25. Ibid., p. 39.
26. Ibid., p. xix.
27. Ibid., p. xxxiv. For the Cyprus case see Hubert Faustmann, “The UN and the
Internationalisation of the Cyprus Conflict, 1949–58,” in Oliver P. Richmond

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

217

and James Kerlindsay (eds.), The Work of the UN in Cyprus (London: Palgrave,
2001), pp. 3–6.
28. Krishna, p. 207.
29. In particular see Sankaran Krishna, Postcolonial Insecurities (University of Minnesota Press), 1999.
30. The practice of self-determination was often played out, particularly in the
context of the UN General Assembly in the framework already provided
by the colonial territorial cartography of the state, which was very much a
multi-ethnic cartography. Yet the popular perception of self-determination
leading to independence was that communities could claim this right. This
debate was confused further by General Assembly resolutions proclaiming
the use of force may be legitimate in certain cases. Where a people have been
denied the right to self-determination by armed force, the right to regain
it by armed struggle is considered permissible under Article 51 of the UN
Charter concerning self-defence. See UN General Assembly Docs. 3070, 3103,
3246, 3328, 3481, 31/91, 32/42 and 32/154. The Geneva Declaration on
Terrorism states: “As repeatedly recognised by the United Nations General
Assembly, peoples who are fighting against colonial domination and alien
occupation and against racist regimes in the exercise of their right of selfdetermination have the right to use force to accomplish their objectives
within the framework of international humanitarian law. Such lawful uses
of force must not be confused with acts of international terrorism.” See UN
General Assembly Doc. A/42/307, 29 May 1987.
31. See for example, the editorial in The Island, 4 January 2002.
32. “Sri Lanka Against UN Intervention,” Xinhua News Agency, May 22, 2000.
33. Oliver P. Richmond, Mediating in Cyprus (London: Frank Cass, 1998), esp.,
Conclusion.
34. Cited in Alan Bullion, “Norway and the Peace Process in Sri Lanka,” conference ‘From Violence to Politics,’ INCORE, The University of Ulster,
Derry/Londonderry, June 27–30, 2001, p. 7.
35. Ibid., p. 9.
36. See Oliver P. Richmond, “Devious Objectives and the Disputants: Views of
International Mediation: A Theoretical Framework,” Journal of Peace Research,
Olso, Vol. 35, No. 6 (1998).
37. Xinhua News Agency, “Sri Lanka Against UN Intervention,” May 22, 2000. “We
do not want ourselves turned into another mess like Bosnia or Sierra Leone
through U.N. resolutions,” according to a spokesman for the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.
38. Kadugnawa School, Participant Observation, July 14, 2001.
39. My own presence as a Western academic was also used to “validate” the
discussion of peace and I was given a role in opening the session in a brief
religious ceremony.
40. NGO Personnel, Personal Interview, July 13, 2001.
41. John Paul Lederach, p. 39.
42. Professor K.M. De Silva, Personal Interview, July 17, 2001.
43. Vikram Singh, Director, ICES Colombo, Personal Interview, Colombo,
July 13, 2001.

218

O. P. Richmond

44. K.M. de Silva.
45. A US-based Sri Lankan academic, also associated with ICES in Kandy,
argued that the government’s anti-interventionary stance was ambiguous
because they allowed NGOs to become involved (in other words, to intervene), even if they provide assistance to the LTTE. This constituted a
separation of humanitarian operations and conflict issues on the part of the
Sri Lanka government, but an interesting blurring of them on the part of
this respondent. He stated that ICES and NPC are often criticized by Sinhala
nationalists as being too liberal. However the government had found that
the NGO community was a convenient vehicle to get aid and humanitarian assistance to the LTTE controlled areas. Stanley Samarasinghe, Personal
Interview, Kandy, July 18, 2001.
46. Diplomatic source, Personal Interview, Colombo, July 14, 2001.
47. Jehan Perera, “More Civic Action to Promote Peace Process is Needed,” NPC
Weekly Bulletin, October 22, 2001.
48. Stanley Samarasinghe, Personal Interview, Kandy, July 18, 2001.
49. Jonathan Steele, “Crouching Tigers, Hidden War,” The Guardian, May 10–
16, 2001, p. 12.
50. Cited in Jehan Perera, “Appreciating the President’s Lament,” NPC Weekly
Report, 3 March, 2002, p. 2.
51. “Emergency declared in Sri Lanka,” BBC News, Nov. 5, 2003,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/3242667.stm.
52. “A Vote for Peace,” The Economist, Dec. 6, 2001.
53. See “Tamil leader breaks cover to bring peace hope,” The Guardian, April 10,
2002.
54. PRIO Annual Report, 1999, pp. 29-30.
55. Tront Jenson, Personal Interview, Nicosia, April 3, 2001.
56. Indeed, in this researcher’s experience, the Greek Cypriot press could be
particularly vitriolic towards those who were seen to be interested in conflict
resolution, condemning outside intervention and those who took part as
betraying just Greek Cypriot positions.
57. Marios Michaelides, Personal Interview, March 29, 2001.
58. This section is based upon interviews conducted at the Fulbright Commission, Nicosia, April 2001.
59. For example I was provided with a flow chart by the US embassy in Nicosia
which illustrates how the “Economic Support Funds” are distributed from US
Congress to USAID. From USAID it is distributed to UNDP, the US Department of State, AMIDEAST, and USGS. UNDP then funds UNOPS’ Bicommunal development program. The Department of State funds Fulbright’s US
scholarship program and AMIDEAST Bicommunal support program. USGS
funds a Water Database Development Program.
60. See Oliver P. Richmond, “Rethinking Conflict Resolution: The Linkage Problematic Between “Track I” and “Track II.”
61. Holly Pearce, Director of Bicommunal Projects, Personal Interview, April 5,
2001.
62. Turkish Cypriot diplomatic source, Personal Interview, March 30, 2001,
Lefkosha.

Conflict Resolution in Sri Lanka and Cyprus

219

63. Such views emerged from a Greek Cypriot diplomatic source, Personal Interview, 18 December 2001, Nicosia.
64. Maria Hadjipavlou, Personal Interview, Nicosia, April 2, 2001.
65. Ahmed Gazioglu, Telephone Interview, Nicosia, April 3, 2001.
66. See “Conflict resolution critics playing a political game,” Cyprus Mail,
Jan. 29, 2002.
67. Cited in “Clerides—Denktash: A Divergence of Views,” Cypria.com, April 1,
2001.
Oliver Richmond is a reader in the Department of International Relations,
University of St. Andrews, UK. His publications include Maintaining Order,
Making Peace (Palgrave, 2002), Mediating in Cyprus (Frank Cass, 1998),
The Work of the UN in Cyprus: Promoting Peace and Development (co-edited,
Palgrave, 2001), and The United Nations and Human Security (co-edited,
Palgrave, 2001).

