Journal of Peace Research
http://jpr.sagepub.com

The Cyprus Peace Talks: A Critical Appraisal
Michális S. Michael
Journal of Peace Research 2007; 44; 587
DOI: 10.1177/0022343307080857
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://jpr.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/44/5/587

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

International Peace Research Institute, Oslo

Additional services and information for Journal of Peace Research can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://jpr.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://jpr.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations (this article cites 4 articles hosted on the
SAGE Journals Online and HighWire Press platforms):
http://jpr.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/44/5/587

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

© 2007 Journal of Peace Research,
vol. 44, no. 5, 2007, pp. 587–604
Sage Publications (Los Angeles, London, New Delhi
and Singapore) http://jpr.sagepub.com
DOI 10.1177/0022343307080857

The Cyprus Peace Talks: A Critical Appraisal*
MICHÁLIS S. MICHAEL
Centre for Dialogue, La Trobe University
Despite three decades of persistent efforts to bring about a negotiated settlement, the small island of Cyprus
still remains physically and demographically divided. Failure of the 2004 Annan Plan has compounded
the need for a thorough reassessment of the Cyprus peace process with a view to ascertaining the reasons
for its collapse. Drawing on the findings of research that attributes the failure of earlier negotiations to the
negative balance between impeding influences and facilitating factors, the author examines the manner
and the extent to which the Annan initiative internalized the lessons learned from these past failures. Was
the collapse of the Annan initiative best explained in terms of the shortcomings of the mediating strategy,
or did it fail because of the continuing intractability of the conflict (i.e. the two sides remain too far apart
on the fundamentals for any mediating strategy to work)? This article examines how the Annan strategy
sought to change the imbalance between impeding and facilitating factors, asking, in particular, where it made
headway, where did it not, and why. It goes on to characterize the overall impeding/facilitating balance in
the post-Annan period and advances a number of propositions on how the imbalance may be shifted in
a more positive direction.

Introduction
After a 20-hour session of intensive negotiations, an exhausted and disenchanted UN
Secretary-General Kofi Annan declared on
11 March 2003 that it was the ‘end of the
road’ for his three-year Cyprus initiative
(UN, 2003b). Thirteen months later, commenting on the failure of his second attempt,
a more circumspect Secretary-General would
simply remark that ‘a unique and historic’
opportunity to resolve the longstanding
problem had been lost (UN, 2004b).
* Author’s email: m.michael@latrobe.edu.au. The author
wishes to thank Joseph Camilleri, director, Centre for
Dialogue, whose assistance throughout has been of
immense value, as well as George Myconos, Larry Marshall
and Alexander Kouttab for their input during the writing
of this article. The author is also indebted to the reviewers
for their commentary, which has helped improve the original manuscript. The views conveyed in this article are
exclusively those of the author.

The failure of the Annan Plan – the initiative
that came closest to achieving agreement –
prompts a critical reappraisal of the entirety
of the peace process as it has unfolded over
the last thirty-odd years, including an analysis of the factors that contributed to its
failure. One reason for failure was alluded to
by the UN Secretary-General himself in his
2003 report: namely, that the intercommunal negotiations1 – alone and in isolation –
were incapable of bringing about a resolution
of the Cyprus conflict (UN, 2003a: para.
5–6). This confirms previous assessments
that influences external to the negotiating
process not only impinge on it, but are
central to its outcome. In other words,
1 For this article, the ‘Cyprus peace talks’ are interchangeably

referred to as ‘intercommunal talks’, ‘intercommunal negotiations’ or ‘Cyprus talks’, although the latter may encompass the participation of additional parties such as Greece,
Turkey, the UK, the USA, and, in recent times, the EU.

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

587

588

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

success or failure in the intercommunal talks
is ultimately determined by the conflict’s
contextual framework, as well as the changing nature of the various parties’ objectives
and strategic priorities.
However, given the protracted record of
the intercommunal negotiations, the above
explanation, insightful as it may be, seems
inadequate. The demise of the Annan effort
raises questions of continuity and whether
lessons were learnt from previous negotiated
attempts. The question is: to what extent,
and in what way, did the Annan initiative
attempt to apply the lessons drawn from the
preceding decades’ failed peace negotiations?
Was the failure of the Annan initiative a
necessary by-product of the irreconcilable
positions of the main protagonists, or was it
also a failure to learn from the mistakes of
the past? Did the initiative fail because of
the shortcomings of the mediating strategy,
or did it fail because of the continuing
intractability of the conflict?
In an attempt to answer these questions,
the article proceeds in five consecutive steps.
The Annan initiative must be evaluated
within the context of earlier unsuccessful
efforts aimed at finding a peaceful resolution
to the conflict. To understand why the
Annan effort failed, the article first examines
those factors that undermined previous
attempts at resolving the Cyprus problem.
Second, having established the impeding/
facilitating factors, the article surveys the
attitudes and actions of the various parties on
the eve of the Annan initiative. Third, it
examines how the Annan initiative addressed
the facilitating/impeding imbalance, evaluates its success and failures, and ascertains
what prevented the strategy from succeeding.
Fourth, the article conducts an overall assessment of the facilitating/impeding factors
afflicting the Cyprus peace talks. Finally, the
article concludes by putting forward certain
ideas that might steer the peace process in a
promising direction.

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

Background
Cyprus features prominently among a cluster
of intractable international conflicts that transcend their own national boundaries and
whose resolution has eluded third-party mediation for almost half a century. The Cyprus
dispute has preoccupied the minds of theorists
and practitioners of conflict resolution ever
since the United Nations stationed its first
peacekeeping force on the island in 1964.
From its earliest stages, the conflict has challenged conventional international analysis and
defied traditional approaches to conflict management, negotiation and peacemaking.
Despite the fact that the Cyprus question
has figured in international diplomacy for
over 50 years, it is generally understood that
the events of 1974 dramatically changed the
nature of the problem, propelling it in an
entirely new direction and compounding the
difficulties faced in all subsequent attempts
at mediation. All peace negotiations have
started from this premise; and, in many
respects, the intercommunal talks are still
dealing with the effects of the 1974 partition
of the island.
In essence, the Cyprus conflict has
become a prime example of linkage politics,
operating as it does on five interrelated levels:
the local (referring to each of the two antagonistic communities), the national (that is,
Cyprus as a whole), the subregional (understood as the Cyprus–Greece–Turkey triangle), the regional (which encompasses its EU,
Southern European and Middle Eastern contexts), and the international (which brings
into relief all other external actors, not least
the United Nations). Within the intercommunal talks – the main formal negotiating
framework – the conflict has been treated as
an internal ethnic dispute between the
majority Greek-Cypriot and the minority
Turkish-Cypriot communities. These negotiations evolved following the intervention of
the UN as a third-party mediator in 1968, a

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

role that has been pivotal to their longevity
(Richmond, 1998). However, by virtue of its
history, geography and demography, the
Cyprus question has never been restricted to
its domestic parameters. As with Sri Lanka,
Northern Ireland and Israel–Palestine, the
Cyprus conflict, when set in its regional and
sociopsychological setting, suffers from the
‘double minority complex’. This means that,
in addition to blurring the inter/intrastate
nature of the conflict, the ethnic divide provides us with an understanding of the ‘double
(in)security’ dilemma preoccupying both
communities and their motherlands. Thus,
the Cyprus conflict has always been an
integral component of the broader Greek–
Turkish problem.

Factors Prior to the Annan Initiative
To gain a deeper appreciation of the underlying causes of the collapse of the Annan initiative, we need to familiarize ourselves with
previous negotiated attempts to settle the
Cyprus problem. In a previous study, I examined the impeding and facilitating factors relevant to conflict resolution during the
1974–94 period (Michael, 1998). The key
conclusion reached was that, during this 20year period, the overall balance between
facilitating and impeding influences had
clearly favoured the negative side of the
ledger. A set of closely interrelated obstacles
had consistently prejudiced the outcome of
the negotiations and overwhelmed the positive impact of internal or external developments at any given time.
On a structural level, the ‘linkage’
approach to negotiations meant that there
could be no settlement unless all aspects of
the Cyprus problem (i.e. those relating to
constitution, territory and security) were
simultaneously agreed upon. As the talks
progressed, new points of disputation arose.
In addition, negotiations were often hampered by new and conflicting interpretations

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

of concepts and principles that had previously
been agreed upon. Also hindering the
process, through much of this period, were
the contrasting motives, priorities, preferences
and objectives of the two sides, who differed
significantly on questions of maintaining/
changing the status quo; rapid unification/
gradual evolution; federation/confederation;
and unitary/(con)federal arrangements.
Second, the insecurity and mistrust felt by
each side created a reluctance to countenance
any change to existing arrangements. The
close relationship and interdependence
between the two communities, on the one
hand, and the principal external powers
(Greece and Turkey), on the other, exacerbated this phenomenon. The conflictual relationship between Greece and Turkey also
impeded the negotiations and altered the
political environment, forcing both sides –
in line with a clearly recognizable action–
reaction dynamic – to adopt confrontational
postures. This was especially so in the case of
the Turkish-Cypriot community. It had a
different historical relationship with Turkey,
was less self-sufficient and lacked an opposition that could effectively challenge the prevailing orthodoxy. As the conflict became
protracted, both communities chose to pursue
their respective interests, with the aim of
strengthening or promoting their legitimacy
as independent international political actors.
Third, when the two sides abandoned
communication and the intercommunal talks
were no longer considered a priority, there
was a return to prior levels and expressions of
tension. Placed in this context, unilateral
actions designed to address military and/or
political insecurities acquired potentially
dangerous dimensions. The net effect was
escalating military capabilities on both sides,
intensification of international campaigns to
bolster the antagonists’ respective causes,
provocative statements and the re-emergence
of nationalist sentiment. The Cyprus problem became the epicentre of the broader

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

589

590

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

Greek–Turkish conflict, eventually implicating
both states.
Paradoxically, these confrontational
phases were often followed by more cooperative ones, injecting into the negotiating
process a fresh impetus for change and
encouraging the two communities to break
from their previously entrenched positions.
This was a necessary condition of progress.
For example, the 1985 High Level Meeting
came about after the 1983 Turkish-Cypriot
Unilateral Declaration of Independence. The
Pérez de Cuéllar and Boutros-Ghali initiatives of the early 1990s were heavily influenced by the Aegean crisis of 1988 and the
Davos experiment. Similarly, border clashes
in 1993–94 and the waning of Greek–
Turkish relations boosted the confidencebuilding measures (CBMs).
Lessons Learnt
The most important lesson learnt from this
20-year process was that the intercommunal
talks, in their current form and operating in
isolation from other initiatives and processes,
could not overcome existing structural and
psychological obstacles to a negotiated settlement. The relative failure of the intercommunal talks stemmed from their inability to
address a number of political, organizational
and social-psychological hurdles. The hurdles
bear closer examination.
First, the negotiating process had developed
a logic and a rhythm which did not necessarily
correspond to the psychology of the political
situation it was seeking to remedy. When, for
example, dramatic developments occurred in
the internal or external environments of the
two parties, the intercommunal talks seemed
incapable of capturing the conciliatory mood
of the day.
Second, the history and geography of the
region is such that to contemplate any
exclusion of the two principal external
powers, Greece and Turkey, from the resolution of the Cyprus problem was simply

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

unrealistic. Closely linked to the above
considerations was the failure to bring about
a sustainable shift in the external environment, especially in the relationship between
Greece and Turkey, in ways that would
provide a more positive congruence between
internal and external influences.
Third, the common interests shared by
the two communities, and the mutual benefits that could result from a negotiated settlement, had not been sufficiently emphasized
conceptually, practically or organizationally
during the intercommunal dialogue. The
players in both communities who could
discern these common benefits, and who had
an interest in establishing a constructive
intercommunal relationship, did not have
the leverage or the resources to endow their
perceptions and priorities with the necessary
degree of legitimacy. Nor did the mediating
parties have a clear sense of the perceptual
shift that was necessary or the resources that
would be needed to underpin it (Fisher,
2001). Finally, the difficulty associated with
persuading their respective compatriots, and
each other, of the value of rapprochement
was compounded by the physical separation
of the two communities.

Attitudes, Actions and Positions on
the Eve of the Annan Initiative
Since the 1950s, and especially the 1960s,
the two communities had increasingly been
politically, economically, socially and psychologically separated. The 1974 partition
gave this separation a geographical and
ethno-demographic dimension. This deeply
entrenched separation constitutes the main
impediment to any rapprochement between
the two communities – a rapprochement
that remains a fundamental precondition for
any sustainable unification of the island and
its inhabitants. The net effect of the physical
division of the island had been to hamper
communication not only between the two

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

communities, but also, most importantly,
between those forces that were prepared to
pursue, or at least explore, common interests
and objectives.2 In addition, postponement
of a solution occasionally prompted one or
both parties to resort to unilateral actions
outside the confines of the process, thereby
exacerbating the conflict and further impeding negotiation and third-party mediation.
Greek- and Turkish-Cypriot
(Negotiating) Mind-Sets
The philosophical framework of the GreekCypriot negotiating position has reflected a
collective value-system shaped primarily by
the events of 1974. A general sense of
insecurity, a fundamental distrust of TurkishCypriot secessionist objectives and fear of
Turkish occupation of the whole island have
coloured all Greek-Cypriot positions. These
concerns were especially evident in the rejection of calls for a joint federal or transitional
government and repeated calls for demilitarization, and were the primary driving emotions for the rejection of the Annan Plan at
the 2004 referenda.
Protracted negotiations, with little or no
sign of progress, caused disillusionment in
the Greek-Cypriot community and forced its
leadership to explore other avenues to
enhance its position beyond the confines of
the intercommunal talks. These included
enhancing its military defence as a way of
2 Although the causes of non-communication are deep-

rooted, the physical division of the island separating Greek
and Turkish Cypriots defines the contextual environment
that, on the one hand, prevents the formation of a bicommunal civil society (and market) while, on the other hand,
facilitating the introspective (and negating) nature of their
corresponding ethno-nationalisms. The partial lifting of
travel restrictions between northern and southern Cyprus
in April 2003 has allowed for initial contact between nonelite Greek and Turkish Cypriots. As yet, no sociological
study has been published about its impact on Greek- and
Turkish-Cypriot attitudes to each other. However, the
ambiguous (legal–jurisdictional) status of this arrangement
combined with a ‘high degree of mistrust’ between officials
has created an environment where cross-‘border’ crime is
on the increase (UN, 2005: para. 23).

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

addressing the security dilemma, a policy of
internationalizing the Cyprus problem and,
throughout the 1990s, vigorous pursuit of its
accession to the EU as a means of securing a
‘European solution’.
However, an important change to what
was perceived initially as an identity-need to
fulfil their ‘historical’ destiny was the
willingness of the Greek Cypriots to make
concessions. Indicative of this was the abandonment by all mainstream political forces of
the historical claim of union with Greece,
énosis, and, more importantly, the eventual
acceptance of a bicommunal/bizonal federation. Rhetoric aside, this implied acceptance
that not all Greek-Cypriot refugees would be
able to return to their homes. Greek-Cypriot
political culture also showed itself to be more
conducive to internal debate over the future
of the island: more autonomous from its
motherland, more inclined to the incorporation of common interests, and more prepared
to address issues of special concern to the
Turkish-Cypriot community. Such concerns
included protection of their (pre-1974)
properties in the south.
However, growing prosperity, a successful
international campaign, a resurgence of
ethno-nationalism and the allure of EU
membership have rendered Greek Cypriots
impervious to socio-economic incentives and
reluctant to relinquish exclusivity over state
sovereignty.3 Internalization of the ‘blame
game’ compounded the 1974 dilemma, sharpening the rift between the pragmatistés (the pragmatists) and mahitikí parátaxi (the fighting
faction).4 While for decades the Greek-Cypriot
3 Since 2003, the World Bank classifies the Republic of

Cyprus (RoC) as a high-income economy. According to the
World Bank in 2004, the RoC ranked 35th in GNI per
capita PPP at $22,330, ahead of both Greece (38th at
$22,000) and Turkey (89th at $7,680). In comparative
terms, Greek Cypriots are three times wealthier than
Turkish Cypriots (GDP per capita $21,600 : $7,135).
4 Condescendingly, opponents refer to the pragmatists as
Endotikoí (the submissive) and fighting faction as Aporiptikoí
(the rejectionists). In recent times, this ideological divide has
evolved into the pro- and anti-Annan factions.

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

591

592

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

leadership proclaimed that ‘our borders are at
Kyrenia’, they were simultaneously negotiating
for a compromise (bicommunal/bizonal)
solution. The net effect was that accrued
Greek-Cypriot expectations were incompatible with the negotiations’ outcome delivery.
The prime objective of the Turkish
Cypriots in the negotiations has been to
enhance and legitimize the post-1974 conditions by preserving and entrenching the basic
structures of their administration. Their historical experience as an isolated minority,
especially during 1963–74, was the primary
reason for distrusting the Greek Cypriots.
They feared that reunification would reestablish their minority status (Soysal, 1992).
On a deeper socio-psychological level, the
need for ‘respect’ (saygé) evolved in reaction
to the Greek Cypriots’ pursuit of an ethnonationalist destiny, one which excluded the
Turkish Cypriots and therefore turned them
towards Turkey (Bryant, 2001: 903).
Typical of most minority groups, the
Turkish Cypriots were inclined to focus on
communal rather than common interests
(Burton, 1990: 142–145). As stated in their
1975 and 1983 unilateral declarations, this
focus resulted in their pursuit of autonomy
and self-determination, both within and
outside the negotiation process (Ertekün,
1984). This, in turn, was embodied in the
often-stated preference for confederation or
loose federation – a position that exacerbated
Greek-Cypriot suspicions about the extent of
their commitment to a unified Cyprus.
Throughout this period, the Turkish-Cypriot
side was determined to approach the negotiating table not as an inferior party, but as one
of two equal entities coming together to cofound a new confederacy.
Another factor impeding progress was the
Turkish Cypriots’ reluctance to make any substantial territorial concessions. The Turkish
Cypriots held the advantage on the territorial
issue but concessions were nevertheless
expected of them. Procrastination on the

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

resettlement of Varosha and their refusal to
concede the return of the northwestern town
of Morphou failed to address the Greek
Cypriots’ minimum territorial demands,
thereby hampering progress towards an
overall agreement.
An additional internal obstacle was the
heavy dependence of the Turkish-Cypriot
minority on support from mainland Turkey.
This, in turn, increased the Greek Cypriots’
belief that the Turkish Cypriots were no more
than pawns in a larger Turkish strategic
design. Finally, one of the main consequences of Rauf R. Denktaş’s dominance of
the Turkish-Cypriot leadership throughout
this period was that there was virtually no
change in Turkish policy. Denktaş’s total
control prevented the emergence of an alternative and more conciliatory TurkishCypriot view.
An important development in the post1974 period was increased levels of TurkishCypriot self-confidence emanating from a
greater sense of security. For the first time,
this led to the development of political
parties and, subsequently, to a TurkishCypriot opposition that advocated coexistence with the Greek Cypriots, as well as less
dependence on Turkey. The movement for
cooperation between the two communities
was not only promoted by the left-wing
opposition parties, such as Comhuriyetçhi
Türk Partisi (CTP) (Republican Turkish
Party) and Toplumcu Kurtulus Partisi (TKP)
(Communal Liberation Party). From the
mid-1990s, this movement also gained currency among the middle and professional
classes. The desire to establish channels of
communications and forge some form of
cooperation with their Greek-Cypriot counterparts was also reflected in the participation
of civil and business actors in a series of
bicommunal management initiatives sponsored by third parties.
What emerges from this discussion is that,
until the Annan initiative, both communities

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

had, for different reasons and in different
ways, become supporters of the status quo.
This imperfect state of affairs was at least
preferable to the uncertainties of any future
regime that did not incorporate the antagonists’ maximum positions/expectations (zerosum game).5 On one side, the Turkish
Cypriots feared that any reunification within
a strong federation would see their position
revert to the pre-1974 situation as an isolated
minority dominated by a larger and more
powerful Greek-Cypriot community. On the
other hand, the Greek Cypriots viewed any
federal solution that did not encompass a
strong central authority and the withdrawal
of Turkish troops (and settlers) as no better
than their existing predicament. They refused
to sacrifice their legitimacy as the sole recognized Cypriot state and risk the total occupation of the island. Though the motivations
and the rationales may have differed, the
positions of the parties were similar in one
important respect: they both considered the
incentives for change to be worth less than
the security of the status quo. In this context,
the lack of a solution was due to the unwillingness of elites on both sides to commit to
a compromise mind-set, preferring instead to
persevere with their own BATNA (Best
Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement).
They dedicated their energies instead to
strengthening institutions, which did little to
change their entrenched positions, and perpetuating a Cold War-like culture (Richmond,
1999: 57). Fear of worst-case scenarios paralysed the will and thwarted the efforts of those
pursuing a riskier, but ultimately more
promising, course.
The Principal External Powers
From the Greek-Cypriot point of view, the
biggest impediment to a solution was the
5 In his 2003 report, Annan confirmed that one of the

obstacles to the resolution of the Cyprus problem was the
parties’ perception of the negotiations as a zero-sum,
win–lose process (UN, 2003a: para. 143).

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

presence of Turkish troops on the island. A
related concern was the settlement of mainland Turks on the northern part of the island.
This created the immediate impression
among Greek Cypriots that the Turks were
pursuing a population policy designed to
change the demographic balance on the
island. Moreover, the settlement of mainland
Turks took place in conjunction with the
emigration of Turkish Cypriots from the
island (Michael, 1998: 203–205). This
phenomenon introduced a more serious
obstacle to agreement, because it altered the
composition and character of the TurkishCypriot community. Apart from the implications for Turkish Cypriots themselves, it
meant that the Greek Cypriots faced an even
less familiar and perhaps more hostile
Turkish community in the north.
Not unconnected to this was Turkey’s
unwillingness or inability to pressure Denktaş
at moments in the negotiations when agreement seemed, if not close, at least feasible.
Paradoxically, interdependence of mainland
and Cypriot Turks allowed Denktaş to exploit
Turkey’s internal political contradictions by
directly appealing to Turkish nationalist sentiment (UK Parliament, 2002: Examination of
Witnesses, 15 February, Phillip Robins, question 47). In particular, Denktaş sought to capitalize on the more serious conflicts between
the traditional secular Kemalist ruling elite and
the emerging Islamists, as well as the divisions
between the civilian government and the
military establishment.
Until the election of the Adalet ve
Kalkénma Partisi (AKP, Justice and Development Party), Turkey failed to accurately
assess the damage which the Cyprus problem
had inflicted on its diplomacy, with regard to
both its broader relationship with Greece and
its policy on European integration. Nowhere
was this more evident than in 1989, when the
European Commission rejected Turkey’s
application, citing its poor human rights
record (i.e. regarding treatment of the

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

593

594

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

Kurdish minority) and the damaging effects
of its dispute with another fellow member
(Greece), particularly over Cyprus (European
Commission, 1989: para. 9). It became
abundantly clear that, in addition to the perception in Europe that Turkey had a nonEuropean culture and religious identity, the
withdrawal of Turkish troops from Cyprus
was the minimum price that Turkey would
be required to pay before joining the EU.
Turkey’s policy-doctrine – premised on the
belief that ‘no solution is a solution’ and that
essentially the Cyprus problem was resolved
in 1974 – proved to be at odds with its
European aspirations.
As the rapprochements of 1975, 1988 and
1998 suggest, both Greece and Turkey were
capable of mediating and managing, if not
resolving, their differences. These infrequent
improvements in Greek–Turkish relations
occurred because they were preceded by confrontationalist moments that brought the two
countries perilously close to war (i.e. the events
of 1974, the Aegean crisis of 1988 and the
Imia/S-300 missile/Öcalan crisis of 1996–99).
In addition, the fact that Greece and Turkey
shared a pro-European orientation, participated in common forums and both enjoyed a
special relationship with the United States had
also at times been conducive to a change of
mood for greater willingness to cooperate.
The UN as the (Third-Party) Mediator
As the most important external player in the
Cyprus problem, the UN derived much
political leverage from its legitimacy as an
institution of international consensus and as
a mediator acceptable to both communities.
However, a lack of economic and military
muscle rendered the UN incapable of effectively applying pressure or, more importantly, of offering incentives at critical
junctures in the negotiations. In the absence
of such leverage, UN Secretaries-General,
when pursuing their various initiatives,
tended to rely in varying degrees on the

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

United States. While consistently advocating
support for UN initiatives throughout this
period and while able to call on its special
relationship with both Greece and Turkey –
which could, in turn, influence their compatriots on the island – Washington had in
mind its own alliance priorities and interests
in the Cyprus dispute. Notwithstanding official rhetoric, these did not always complement UN resolutions.6 Other impediments
to effective UN mediation emanated from
the UN’s methodology in handling the negotiations. The organization’s conservative
diplomatic style and bureaucratic/cultural/
structural obstacles to change saw the UN
wedded to a formal legalistic approach to
intercommunal negotiations.7 Despite its
activism, the UN was unable to adopt innovative and imaginative ideas, let alone negotiating strategies and approaches that might
have emphasized common interests and
mutual benefits.8
This was to change, for although the
Secretary-General’s original intentions were
to accommodate and facilitate the negotiating process, his initiatives grew bolder as
talks became protracted and frequently
bogged down. UN intervention evolved to
such a point that the Boutros-Ghali proposals explicitly tackled the controversial territorial issue with the submission of a UN map
that, for the first time, sought to establish
boundaries. The legitimacy and status of the

6 US involvement in the Cyprus problem has always been

determined by fluctuations in Greek–Turkish relations and
their effects on NATO’s eastern flank. All subsequent post1974 US initiatives (Kissinger, Nimetz plan, Haass,
Holbrooke) exhibited a preference for direct bilateral discussions between Greece and Turkey, rather than the UNsponsored intercommunal talks.
7 In his 1999 report, Annan stated that the negotiations
had become ‘overlain with legalistic abstractions and artificial labels’ removing them from the ‘actual needs’ of the
two communities (UN, 1999: para. 7).
8 Concurring with this assessment, Mirbagheri (1998: 156)
considers the UN’s failure to bring about a fundamental
change in the two sides’ perception of each other as the
major impediment to the stalemate.

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

Secretary-General’s office meant that these
proposals had a greater chance of receiving
favourable consideration by the two parties,
since they derived from an independent third
party that enjoyed the support of the Security
Council and, indirectly, of the international
community.
Closely linked to the UN’s mediation of
the Cyprus problem was the auxiliary role of
the United States. As a result of the Turkish
arms embargo, a series of initiatives emerged
with the direct involvement of the US president. Despite their ultimate failure, American
ideas – such as the Nimetz plan, the
Haass/Reagan doctrine and the Holbrooke
scheme – provided the UN SecretaryGeneral with a reservoir of initiatives, especially in the context of common interests and
mutual gains (Haass, 1987). These initiatives
also led to a closer relationship between the
United States and the UN, with the former
prepared to lend effective support to the
various initiatives of the Secretaries-General
and, where necessary, to exert diplomatic
pressure on Greece and Turkey. In the postHelsinki climate, US policy was geared
towards retaining the momentum of
Greek–Turkish détente, keeping Turkey focused
on its European orientation and increasing
pressure on the two communities to reach a
settlement before Cyprus’s accession impedes
Greek–Turkish and Euro-Turkish relations
(Barkey & Gordon, 2002).
The preceding analysis would suggest that
the attitudes of the conflicting parties to each
other and problems with the peace process
emanated from key turning points in the conflict’s history. These historically significant
moments – in particular 1964 and 1974 – generated resentment that came to be embedded
in the collective psyche of both communities.
This sense of past injustice, operating on both
individual and group levels, in conjunction
with a strong sense of insecurity, formed the
basis for the antagonists’ attitudinal behaviour
prior to the Annan initiative.

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

The Annan Initiative: Redressing
the Impeding/Facilitating Imbalance
Policymakers, analysts and commentators
alike have characterized the current phase of
the Cyprus conflict as the most crucial since
1974. As we saw previously, prior to 1999,
there was little progress in relation either to
the intercommunal negotiations or to the
conflict’s contextual condition. The warming
of Greek–Turkish relations in the late 1990s
proved once again that progress on the Cyprus
conflict relied heavily on the fluctuating
Greek–Turkish barometer. Nonetheless, the
catalyst for this newfound optimism rested
with the increasing role of the EU in the
Cyprus conflict. The continued worth of the
EU’s contribution to the peace process relies
on its capacity to adjust the asymmetric relationships between the two/four main conflictual parties: namely, Greece/Greek
Cypriots, Turkey/Turkish Cypriots. For the
first time since 1974, it appeared that
Greece/Greek Cypriots had some influence,
indeed leverage, over Turkey’s own European
aspirations. The change in this dynamic provided the preconditions for shifts in entrenched
positions, attitudes and behaviour, sufficient
at any rate to convince the UN SecretaryGeneral to launch a new initiative (UN,
2003a: para. 6).
Drawing on previous failed efforts, Annan
set out to utilize external developments as
‘enabling’ pathways to accommodation
between the two communities. The Annan
strategy rested on a four-prong ‘linkage’
approach: first, to utilize Cyprus and Turkey’s
EU accession as a ‘catalyst’ for settlement/
membership; second, to enlist the active
support of the key external parties, the
United States and the United Kingdom;
third, to lock in the support of the motherlands, Greece and Turkey; and, fourth, to use
these pathways to alter the entrenched positions of the two communities (Hannay,
2005). Parallel to this ‘game plan’, the

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

595

596

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

intercommunal negotiations, through a
combination of proximity and direct talks,
would continue deliberating in order to narrow
the parties’ core differences (i.e. those relating
to constitutional, territorial and security
matters).
With little progress at the intercommunal
talks and confronted with ‘conflicting calendars’, Kofi Annan submitted his ‘Basis for
Agreement on a Comprehensive Settlement
of the Cyprus Problem’ in November 2002.9
A number of factors convinced the SecretaryGeneral that this was an opportune time to
intervene, including a change of government
following the Turkish elections (3 November);
the Greek-Cypriot presidential campaign to
succeed Clerides (February 2003); Denktaş’s
recovery from open-heart surgery; and, most
importantly, the forthcoming Copenhagen
European Summit set to finalize Cyprus’s
accession and to consider Turkey’s candidature
(12–13 December) (UN, 2003a: para. 42).
A central plank in the Annan Plan was the
attempted nexus with the EU as both
content and process. To comprehend the
extent to which the EU became an integral
part of a political settlement to the Cyprus
problem, one need only examine the 183
pages of the UN plan, where, from the very
outset, the fate of a Cyprus settlement is
linked to its EU accession.
The Annan initiative consisted of two
interventions. The first took place between
the tabling of the plan (11 November 2002)
and the Hague summit (10 March 2003), and
the second covered the period from January
2004 to the referendum (24 April 2004).
Procedurally, the initiative was interlinked with
the Cyprus–EU’s enlargement process that
aimed at inducting a reunified Cyprus into the
9 The Annan Plan was first submitted on 11 November

2002 and revised on 10 December 2002, 26 February 2003
and 29 March 2004. The fifth and final version was completed on 31 March 2004. Corrigenda and clarifications
were issued on 18 April 2004 and submitted to the parties
on 23 April 2004, at http://www.cyprus-un-plan.org (27
April 2004).

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

European Union. The interfaced UN–EU
timetable entailed interim agreement deadlines that culminated in simultaneous, but
separate, referenda of both communities (in
the first attempt the referendum was set 16
days before the signing of the EU Accession
Treaty and eventually took place a week
before the formal accession of Cyprus). The
Annan strategy also incorporated Greece and
Turkey into the negotiations initially at a
track two level (UN, 2003a: para. 50) and
later at the second phase of the 13 February
Agreement process in Bürgenstock (UN,
2004a: para. 30–41).10
Annan Plan: Successes and Failures
Despite high expectations of a major policy
shift by the newly elected AKP government,
Annan’s first attempt collapsed. This was due
mainly to Denktaş’s rejectionist position prevailing as Turkish national policy. After the
Hague summit, the looming Iraq crisis
shifted Turkey’s regional and international
attention away from Cyprus.11 However,
beyond first-track diplomacy, significant
shifts were occurring within the Turkish/
Turkish-Cypriot dynamic. The challenge
to the Kemalist establishment in Turkey
began to alter the contextual sociopolitical
parameters in Northern Cyprus. This encouraged Turkish-Cypriot dissenters to challenge
Denktaş’s political hegemony. Anti-Denktaş
mobilization sustained itself throughout the
year and fed into the domestic election campaign (14 December 2003). The election
10 The 13 February Agreement consisted of a three-phase

process that would lead to a referendum on a finalized plan
before the formal EU accession of the RoC (1 May 2004):
in phase 1, the parties would have to agree by 22 March
2004; if this was not achieved, then, in phase 2, the UN
Secretary-General (SG) would broaden the negotiations to
include Greece and Turkey to reach agreement by 29
March 2004; if there was still no agreement, then the UN
SG was authorized to finalize the text to be submitted to
the referendum (UN, 2004a: Annex I).
11 Verheugen labelled Cyprus the ‘first casualty’ of the Iraq
war, as the latter altered Turkey’s national priorities (Cyprus
Mail, 15 March 2004).

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

result was a moral victory for the opposition
parties but produced a ‘hung’ parliament
comprising the pro- and anti-status quo
parties. Eventually, Turkish national intervention compelled opposition leader Mehmet Ali
Talat to form a coalition with Serdar Denktaş’s
Demokrat Parti (DP, Democratic Party).
Just as a more active civil society was imperative to transform the political consciousness in
Northern Cyprus – leading to the Turkish
Cypriots’ acceptance (64.9%) of the Annan
Plan – it proved equally important, but with an
opposite effect, in the Greek Cypriots’ rebuff
(75.8%) of the Secretary-General’s blueprint.
Complacent that the Greek Cypriots supported Annan’s plan, third parties were taken by
surprise when most of their political leadership,
spearheaded by President Tassos Papadopoulos
in his declaration of 7 April 2004, called for a
resounding ‘no’ vote at the referendum. As
Papadopoulos was exasperated by Turkey’s
insufficient troop reduction and international
guarantees, his rejectionism rested on his conviction that the negative consequences resulting
from a ‘yes’ vote far outweighed those from a
‘no’ vote. This compounded the uncertainty
facing the Greek Cypriots caused by the disbanding of the RoC.
Closer scrutiny reveals that such naivety on
the part of the international community was
misplaced, given that all opinion polls had
most Greek Cypriots rejecting the Annan Plan
consistently ever since it first appeared in
November 2002; and despite the strenuous
efforts by external third parties, this opposition did not waver prior to the referendum.
Greek-Cypriot rejectionism rested on a
combination of historical and contemporary
factors. Until Papadopoulos’s rejection, the
Greek-Cypriot leadership, confronted with a
longstanding dilemma, was divided over the
Annan Plan. This split resonated with the
overall anxiety that beset the Greek Cypriots,
especially as they realized the inevitability of
a deadline decision, while comforted by the
certainty of EU accession. The angst was best

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

epitomized by the AKEL’s contradictory
position, which initially supported the ‘yes’
case, then sought a postponement, only to
support the ‘no’ vote two days prior to the
referendum. Supporters of the plan were
unable effectively to counter the anti-Annan
lobby, initially hamstrung by the Papadopoulos
government’s non-committal stance indicated
by its refusal to undertake a public information
campaign.12 Papadopoulos’s intervention reinforced the adversarial (rather than dialogic)
atmosphere prevailing among the Greek
Cypriots. The majority of Greek Cypriots
approached the referendum not as an opportunity to usher in a new era of collaboration,
peace and prosperity, but rather as a rearguard defence to safeguard their sovereigntyidentity. Intervention by foreign dignitaries
to influence the vote only exacerbated the
situation and had the opposite effect.
A preliminary assessment of the factors
that militated against success suggests that,
despite ample evidence to the contrary, the
Secretary-General and others seriously misread,
misunderstood and miscalculated GreekCypriot public opinion. Their strategy rested
on four key errors of judgement: first, the
mediators failed to take into account the
Greek Cypriots’ historical dilemma over a
federal solution. As mentioned before, there
has always been an undercurrent of dissent
over federalism among Greek Cypriots, ever
since their (reluctant) acceptance of it in the
mid-1970s. Second, by interacting exclusively with the political elite, the mediators
created a communicative comfort zone at the
expense of identifying, earlier on, and engaging in dialogue with their potential detractors. Third, they overestimated the capacity
of bicommunal citizen groups to shift GreekCypriot attitudes and behaviour. The
12 Rather, the RoC spokesperson considered public enlight-

enment a responsibility of the political parties. PIO, Daily
Briefing by the Government Spokesperson (in Greek), 17
February 2004, at http://www.pio.gov.cy/greek/news/spokesman/spokesman454.htm (18 February 2004).

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

597

598

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

presumption that the same strategy that
convinced the Turkish Cypriots would work
with the Greek Cypriots reveals a fundamental misreading of Cypriot civil society
and the conflict’s internal dynamics. Finally,
by being wedded to a timeline with predetermined goals, the negotiating process left little
room for review, reflection and feedback.13
Despite its weaknesses, the Annan initiative
did have some positive effects. It served as a catalyst for radical change in the Turkish-Cypriot
leadership – sidelining Denktaş, who, as seen
earlier, was considered as the main ‘spoiler’ of
a Cyprus settlement. For the first time, both
constituencies were forced to debate the future
solution of the Cyprus problem. This, in turn,
impacted on the two largest (Greek) Cypriot
parties. The right-wing DISY split over the referendum, with the party endorsing the ‘yes’
campaign, while the left-wing AKEL, as seen
above, opted for a ‘soft’ ‘no’. The opposing
positions of the AKEL and the CTP on the referendum elevated the intercommunal dialogue
to a more substantial and pragmatic level,
where differences rather than commonalities
were accentuated. The ensuing debate exposed
the differences within each side, thus allowing
the ‘other’ side to observe, first hand, internal
divisions and disagreements.
The net effect in conflict resolution terms
was to dispel misconceptions regarding
monolithic/one-dimensional attitudes on
both sides. The pressure to repudiate intransigent (negotiating) behaviour resulted in the
lifting of travel restrictions over the Green
Line, thus allowing for movement, contact
and interaction between Greek and Turkish
Cypriots on a critical-mass scale. Although
susceptible to external constraints and situational variables, the phenomenon introduced
another layer of communication in addition
to those usually dominated by the elites.
13 In concluding his report to the Security Council on his

Cyprus effort, Annan pronounced the need for a ‘fundamental reassessment of the full range of United Nations
peace activities in Cyprus’ (UN, 2004a: para. 92).

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

The Annan project gave the previously
marginalized Turkish-Cypriot civil society a
new lease of life and created the conditions for
joint collaboration. The referendum provided
Greek- and Turkish-Cypriot ‘yes’ campaigns the
opportunity to collaborate, share resources and
knowledge, and, by doing so, created a shared
collective memory. The UN’s mediating efforts
have shown that Greece and Turkey are
amenable to formulating mutually supportive
policies and that a solution to the Cyprus problem is largely predicated on domestic developments in Turkey. Finally, the UN exercise has
clearly and decisively introduced the EU as an
indispensable component in the Cyprus equation.
What Prevented the Annan Strategy
from Succeeding?
In addition to the above reasons, a postmortem of the Annan strategy reveals that,
essentially, it stumbled – albeit with contextual variations – on the same cluster of factors
that plagued previous mediating efforts.
Synchronizing external and internal processes proved – once again – elusive, and this,
ultimately, frustrated outcome delivery. By
interfacing the negotiating process with the
EU–Cyprus accession calendar, Annan
installed a definitive timeline as a mechanism
to counter the cycle of indecision. In retrospect, the Annan ‘deadline’ proved counterproductive, because it did not allow sufficient
time for the new Turkish-Cypriot leadership to
adapt to the new conditions and (re)establish
its working relationship with the AKEL.
As mentioned above, the Annan strategy
rested on a flawed appraisal of the GreekCypriot community and the assumption that
the Greek government, as in the Turkish case,
could sway its community’s political behaviour. Failure to differentiate the two sets of
relationships and devise appropriate strategies was a miscalculation that ultimately led
to a failure of the referendum.
As mentioned above, situational factors
were also a crucial factor in the failure of the

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

Annan initiative. The change of governments
in Greece and, in particular, the RoC resulted
in a diminished sense of ownership, in terms
of both process and outcome, on the part of
the new leadership. Closer scrutiny of GreekCypriot politics reveals that Papadopoulos’s
rejectionism rested on three main factors:
first, the revival of the hardline mahitiki
parataxi and its diversification beyond traditional ideological constraints; second, the
capacity of the ‘no’ coalition to tap successfully into the population’s uncertainty and
insecurity; and, third, securing EU accession
boosted the sense of denunciation among the
Greek Cypriots as they considered themselves to be in an advantageous negotiating
position, with the option of improving on
whatever settlement was being offered.
All this having been said, it does not
follow that Papadopoulos was solely or even
primarily to blame for the ‘no’ vote. Such an
assessment is simplistic in that it fails to take
account of the underlying causes of GreekCypriot rejection. In essence, the Annan
strategy failed to reassure the Greek Cypriots
about their security concerns (troop reduction and guarantees) and satisfactorily
address their emotional attachment to land
(regarding property exchange and territorial
adjustments).
Reforms that aspire to usher in a new state
of affairs require both popular legitimacy and
a groundswell of support. Although the referendum became the apex for the Turkish
Cypriots’ ‘quiet’ revolution, this did not resonate with their compatriots in the south.
In campaigning terms, this reflected the
inability of a third force in Cypriot politics
to counter the excesses of ethno-nationalism.
The absence of the subjective factor in generating a spirit of commonality meant that
there was no momentum in the final stages
of the negotiating process to boost the cause
of a settlement. Rather, confronted with a
political dilemma, the majority of the Greek
Cypriots opted for the certainty of the status

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

quo. Inevitably, failure of the referendum has
been blamed on political and situational
causes, but a deeper scrutiny reveals that
polarization is a by-product of the negotiating culture. Both the way the negotiations
were conducted and the way the proposals
were framed reinforced communalism at the
expense of individualism (e.g. by stressing
communal quotas, resettlement limitations,
separate elections and property rights).14
Finally, another factor contributing to the
failure of the Annan initiative has to do with
the EU’s own inability to devise and pursue
a consistent Cyprus policy. This is symptomatic of the EU’s broader problem, namely,
the fact that the competing (and conflicting)
interests of its member-states often render it
incapable of constructing a common foreign
and defence policy. The EU’s internal difficulties simply meant that the EU itself
became a larger arena within which the
Cyprus conflict would now be played out.
Compounded by its dilemma over whether
settlement should be a precondition for
Cyprus’s accession, the EU failed in two
important respects: first, by not dispelling
the Greek-Cypriots’ hubris over unconditional accession, including their misplaced
reliance on acquis communautaire; and,
second, being unable to offer itself as an
alternative security context at both the macro
and micro levels (Tocci, 2004).

Impeding and Facilitating Factors
After the Annan Effort
Even though it was applied in what were
especially favourable conditions, the Annan
Plan offered a timely reminder that intercommunal negotiations, first-track diplomacy and
14 This is best exemplified by those provisions in the Annan

Plan that restrict individuals’ legal recourse, both domestically and through the European Court of Human Rights,
in pursuing their property rights independent of the
Cyprus Property Board (see Annex VII, Article 5 and
attachment 5, ‘Letter to the president of the European
Court of Human Rights’).

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

599

600

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

UN mediation – important as their contribution might be – both individually and
collectively are nevertheless inadequate. They
are by themselves unable to overcome the
constraints that have steadfastly prevented
the resolution of the Cyprus conflict. There
appears to be a missing link that prevents
progress at the peace talks from resonating at
the level of inter- and intracommunal
relations. There are three interconnected
factors that contribute to the inadequacy of
current and historical negotiating approaches.
The first is a communication problem. In
addition to a problem-solving mechanism, the
peace talks act as a communicative process.
For reasons outlined above, the absence of a
multifaceted communicative framework that
spans across/between different agents and
modes of interaction has meant that the
intercommunal talks (and their state participants) have tended to monopolize the peace
process. The systemic control of communications has impacted on the Cyprus conflict
in two rather profound ways. The physical
separation and isolation of the two communities from each other has created, over time,
a ‘fish-bowl’ effect, allowing the adversarial
culture prevalent at the intercommunal
negotiations to permeate the societal spectrum of their relationship. Separatism and
threat perception created a bipolar siege
mentality that simultaneously deterred interactive processes between the two communities and reinforced the dominance of
state-centric communalism over civil societyinfused communal interaction.
The second dilemma stems from the cultural development of group-identity socialization during colonial and post-colonial
Cyprus. The inability of Cypriot public
policy to distinguish between ethnic identity
and political citizenship, as well as communalism and individualism, has hindered the
emergence of an integrative civic nationalism. Drawing on this lesson, social scientists
are gradually turning their attention to the

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

necessary subjective preconditions that would
sustain any political settlement to the Cyprus
discord and prevent it lapsing into the
conflictual trend outlined above.
To understand the third impediment, we
need to alter our analytical perspective to
accurately map power relations between
internal and external protagonists. Most analysts have treated the Cyprus dispute as either
an interstate conflict between two ethnic
groups or a manifestation of a broader
Greco-Turkish rivalry. Invariably, conflict
resolutionalists explain it away in the symmetrical–asymmetrical vernacular as the
‘double minority’ syndrome (i.e. the TurkishCypriot minority within the island and the
Greek-Cypriot minority within its subregional context). However, contrary to both
analyses, the Cyprus conflict has never been
between the island’s two ethno-communities
or even between Greece and Turkey. Rather,
the Cyprus conflict has essentially pitted one
brand of majoritarianism against another:
that is, the Greek-Cypriot community
against Turkey. Expressed a little differently,
the main forces driving the Cyprus conflict
have historically been Greek-Cypriot nationalism and Turkey’s national strategic interests. This dichotomy has recently been
accentuated in more transparent terms by
Turkey’s and the (Greek-Cypriot-controlled)
RoC’s interaction in EU institutions, forums
and deliberations.

Learning from Past Mistakes
As we have seen above, consistent in the failed
mediated efforts, under a variety of circumstances, has been the prevalence of the impeding over the facilitating factors. To redress this
balance and to shift the situation in a more
positive direction, a series of initiatives are
necessary in order to build confidence and
trust among the Cypriot communities. Our
purpose is not to exhaust the entire gamut of
possible recommendations but to highlight

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

those proposals that are conceptually and
practically relevant to the conflict.
Most short-term recommendations, such
as those proposed by the Bonn International
Centre for Conversion (Sommer, 2005) and
the International Crisis Group (2006), aim at
creating conditions that are conducive for the
recommencement of settlement talks. In order
for Greek- and Turkish-Cypriot advocates of
rapprochement to be successful under these
conditions, their respective campaigns must
be conducted with greater synchronization,
and their advocacy needs to be supported by
at least a few tangible benefits, even in the
short term. Only such practical results are
likely to give force to the argument that reconciliation of the island would work to the
advantage of both communities. Settlement of
secondary issues, such as Varosha, the Nicosia
International Airport and implementation of
CBMs, would help to mitigate the mistrust
that has divided the country while strengthening the cause for collaboration.
Careful analysis of the underlying causes
that have led to the failure of peace talks generally, and the Annan initiative in particular,
suggests the emergence of new trends that
justify cautious optimism. A major impetus
to this shift has been the EU-ization of the
Cyprus conflict. This has opened more
avenues of interaction and communication
beyond the political elite, whose capacity to
shift Greek-Cypriot and Turkish national
policy is limited. By providing the political,
economic and security incentives necessary
for coexistence, the EU offers itself as an
alternative source of identity to that of
ethno-nationalism. Such an intervention
involves interfacing with local nationalism by
enhancing those ‘shared’ elements that, for
historical reasons, have been prevented from
steering the political culture towards civil
nationalism.
Ultimately, EU-ization’s success will rest
on the extent to which this process has a
denationalizing effect on both Greek-Cypriot

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

and Turkish nationalisms. In the longer term,
Europeanization of the Cyprus conflict will
have a beneficial transformative effect on
the principal parties to the conflict, so long
as participation and interaction with EU
instrumentalities, forums and institutions
are sensitively guided and sustained.
In this context, one idea that deserves
attention is the inclusion of Turkish-Cypriot
representatives in EU institutions, forums
and activities – preferably as part of the
Cyprus delegation. This would see the election of two Turkish Cypriots to the European
Parliament as part of the six that Cyprus is
entitled to – equivalent to the Turkish proportion of the Cyprus population. If such an
arrangement proved difficult, either because
of RoC objections or because of legal complications, then the two Turkish-Cypriot representatives could attend as observers. It may
also be useful to enable the participation of
Turkish-Cypriot members in the civil
society-orientated European Economic and
Social Committee and regional assembly, the
Committee of the Regions.
As a ‘turning point’, EU-ization of the
Cyprus conflict is premised on the EU’s
capacity to alter the context and the scope of
the conflict. EU activities have precipitated
change in terms of processes, parties, issues
and history. In this respect, the challenge for
the EU and the UN lies in their capacity to
handle a process that strengthens peacebuilding measures through situational, procedural, institutional, structural and cultural
intervention. Attaining a sustainable peace
within Cyprus requires reconciliation of
competing values, interest and needs: these
can be addressed only in a consolidated
democratic environment. Dispute issues
pertain essentially to the terms of coexistence, the meaning of equality and how to
redress the legacy of past injustices (restorative justice). From a transformative perspective, any political settlement to the Cyprus
conflict needs to meet two fundamental

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

601

602

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H

prerequisites: to satisfy all stakeholders by
limiting further victimization and, thus, to
safeguard against future discord; and,
second, a successful settlement should entail
mechanisms, incentives and processes for
intercommunal integration rather than
entrenching communalism.
Much is to be gained from joint bicommunal partnerships, ventures, institutions
and projects that are diverse (e.g. business,
environment, local, epistemic) and conducive to more transparent and participatory
processes (which are people-centred and
democratic). The re-establishment of contacts between political parties could help to
advance a process out of which might emerge
common policies across a whole array of
issues not usually associated with the hard
core of the Cyprus problem. Three interrelated areas lend themselves to common
political deliberation: the distribution and
depletion of resources, industrial relations
and environmental protection.
Another measure that would significantly
aid the current climate is for third-party mediators to engage in political discourse with their
detractors. By embarking on a consultation
process with Greek- and Turkish-Cypriot civil
society and commerce, the UN and the EU
will encounter the whole spectrum of views,
not only on the details of the Annan Plan, but,
more importantly, on how Cypriots see the
future of Cyprus. Such a ‘Cyprus Future
Project’ would allow the diversity of opinions
from people and communities traditionally
marginalized from the centre of power/decisionmaking to be taken into account.
This leads us to another idea: the presence
of intercultural, interfaith and intercommunal dialogue in Cyprus would greatly
enhance reconciliation and rapprochement
on the island. One approach in this direction
is to establish a centre for dialogue. Funded
primarily by the EU, the initiative must be
the culmination of local, Greek, Turkish and
European civil society and business efforts

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007

with the broadest possible support among
Cypriots. In addition to providing support
for the above ‘Cyprus Future Project’, such a
centre could conduct a feasibility study on
the measures proposed by the Reconciliation
Chapter of the Annan Plan – including the
Reconciliation Commission, guidelines for
school textbooks and the teaching of Greek
and Turkish – and it could recommend other
steps that would harmonize relations between
the communities.

Conclusion
When Cypriots seek an analogy for an unworkable situation, they exclaim that ‘it’s become
like the Cyprus problem’. It was inevitable that,
over time, the intercommunal talks would leave
an enduring imprint on the psychological constitution of the island’s people and acquire the
character of the conflict itself.
A summation of the current landscape
reveals that, ever since the acceptance of a
bicommunal/bizonal federation, negotiations
have followed a cyclical pattern, wherein disagreements on the substantial issues have seen
both sides regularly return to their entrenched
positions. As a result, the parties remained
divided, even though they had discussed all
issues to the point of exhaustion. In conceptual terms, disagreement over reunification
has fundamentally revolved around its structural form and, at least implicitly, the nature
of power-sharing. As the Annan initiative
demonstrated, underlying these differences
has been a current of mistrust between the two
sides and a deep sense of insecurity, which the
peace talks have not been able to convincingly
address.
However, the Annan initiative has also
introduced new features into the conflict that,
in conjunction with broader internal and
external changes, place Cyprus at the crossroads
of transition (Potier, 2005). As the prominent
new feature, EU-ization/Europeanization of
the Cyprus triangle offers a ‘unique historical

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Michális S. Michael

process’ (Rehn, 2005) to securitize the
conflict across its various levels and conflicting
parties. In juxtaposition with Turkey’s EU
accession course and policy shift on Cyprus, the
preconditions are conducive for a new peace
effort to settle the Cyprus problem.
As this article has been at pains to show,
no settlement can be externally imposed on
the internal parties without their concurrence and participation – a prerequisite for
conferring on the peace process the necessary
legitimacy. Without this legitimacy, the
impeding factors that have been a constant of
the negotiating landscape will once again
hold sway. To succeed, such a strategy must
be grounded in a proper analysis of the
impeding and facilitating factors whose
imbalance has militated against a successful
settlement of the Cyprus problem. Such an
effort needs to include two new additional
features: an extensive consultation process
with a variety/diversity of societal and industry groups beyond the customary political
elite; and a culmination of a synchronized
local and third-party effort. This would
require greater EU collaboration with the
UN and the active involvement of other
external powers besides the United States and
United Kingdom. Candidates might include
Russia, Germany and France.
Finally, a caveat: the window of opportunity presented by the EU-ization of the
Cyprus conflict is not open-ended. Fluctuations
in the contextual parameters occur frequently. There is another possibility, namely,
that the Cyprus conflict will become so
entangled in Turkey’s accession as to remain
stalemated along with the latter. In such circumstances, the EU’s strongly legalistic
approach may help to ‘depoliticize’ the
Cyprus conflict, only to see it descend into
endless legal squabbles over land, property
and compensation. Lack of progress and tangible outcomes can quickly lead to disappointment, even despair, and a reversion to
adversarial nationalism and the security of

C Y P R U S P E A C E TA L K S

the status quo. Can the EU take hold of
the underlying psychology of the Cyprus
problem and offer an arena in which the parties
can constructively reimagine the future? That
capacity on the EU’s part, conceptual as much as
institutional, has yet to be demonstrated.

References
Barkey, Henri & Phillip Gordon, 2002. ‘Avoiding a
Cyprus Crisis’, Policy Brief 102, Brookings
Institution.
Bryant, Rebecca, 2001. ‘Justice or Respect? A
Comparative Perspective on Politics in Cyprus’,
Ethnic and Racial Studies 24(6): 892–924.
Burton, John, 1990. Conflict: Resolution and
Prevention. London: Macmillan.
Ertekün, Necati M., 1984. The Cyprus Dispute
and the Birth of the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus. London: Rustem.
European Commission, 1989. Commission
Opinion on Turkey’s Request for Accession to the
Community. SEC (89) 2290, final/2, Brussels.
Fisher, Ronald J., 2001. ‘Cyprus: The Failure
of Mediation and the Escalation of an
Identity-Based Conflict to an Adversarial
Impasse’, Journal of Peace Research 38(3):
307–326.
Haass, Richard N., 1987. ‘Cyprus: Moving
Beyond Solution’, Washington Quarterly 10(2):
183–190.
Hannay, David, 2005. Cyprus: The Search for a
Solution. London: I. B. Tauris.
International Crisis Group, 2006. ‘The Cyprus
Stalemate: What Next?’, Europe Report 17,
Brussels.
Michael, Michalis S., 1998. ‘Proposals for
Resolving the Cyprus Problem: 1974–1994’,
PhD dissertation, La Trobe University.
Mirbagheri, Farid, 1998. Cyprus and International
Peacemaking. London: Hurst.
Potier, Tim, 2005. ‘Cyprus: Entering Another
Stalemate?’, Chatham House Briefing Paper,
European Programme EP BP 05/03.
Rehn, Olli, 2005. ‘Cyprus: One Year After
Accession’, Speech/05/278, Nicosia, 13 May.
Richmond, Oliver, 1998. Mediating in Cyprus:
The Cypriot Communities and the U.N.
London: Frank Cass.

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

603

604

jour nal of P E A C E R E S E A RC H
Richmond, Oliver, 1999. ‘Ethnonationalist
Debates and International Peacemaking: The
Case of Cyprus’, Nationalism and Ethnic
Politics 5(2): 36–61.
Sommer, Jerry, 2005. ‘Security in Cyprus: Threat
Perceptions, Possible Compromises and the
Role of the EU’, Bonn International Centre
for Conversion Paper 44.
Soysal, Mümtaz, 1992. ‘Political Parties in the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and
Their Vision of “the Solution”’, in Norma
Salem, ed., Cyprus: A Regional Conflict and Its
Resolution. New York: St. Martin’s (39–43).
Tocci, Nathalie, 2004. EU Accession Dynamics and
Conflict Resolution: Catalysing Peace or Consolidating Partition in Cyprus? Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
UK Parliament (House of Commons), 2002.
Sixth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee
on Turkey. London: HMSO.
UN, 1999. Document S/1999/707. Report of the
Secretary-General on His Mission of Good
Offices in Cyprus.
UN, 2003a. Document S/2003/398. Report of
the Secretary-General on His Mission of Good
Offices in Cyprus.

volume 44 / number 5 / september 2007
UN, 2003b. SG/SM/8630. ‘Secretary-General
Says “End of Road” Reached Concerning
Current Cyprus Talks but “Plan Remains on
the Table”’, press release, 11 March.
UN, 2004a. Document S/2004/437. Report of
the Secretary-General on His Mission of Good
Offices in Cyprus.
UN, 2004b. SG/SM/9269. ‘“Unique and Historic”
Chance to Resolve Cyprus Problem Missed,
Says Secretary-General, After Settlement Plan
Rejected’, press release, 26 April.
UN, 2005. Document S/2005/353. Report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operations in Cyprus.

MICHÁLIS S. MICHAEL, b. 1960, PhD in
Politics (La Trobe University, 1998); Research
Fellow, Centre for Dialogue, La Trobe
University (2001– ); current interests: conflict
resolution, Greece–Turkey–Cyprus, dialogue
across civilizations, cultures and religions.
Most recent book: Cyprus in the Modern World
(co-editor, Vanias, 2005).

Downloaded from http://jpr.sagepub.com at La Trobe University on September 19, 2007
© 2007 International Peace Research Institute, Oslo. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

