What Kind of Peace is Being Built?
Taking Stock of Post-Conflict Peacebuilding
and Charting Future Directions

A Discussion Paper

Michael Lund
Senior Associate
Management Systems International, Inc. and
Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, D.C.

Prepared on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of Agenda for Peace for the
International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
Ottawa, Canada

January 2003
The views expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily represent
those of the International Development Research Centre.

I.
FOCUS:
PEACEBUILDING TEN YEARS AFTER AGENDA FOR PEACE
The tenth anniversary of the UN Secretary General’s influential Agenda for
Peace in 2002 is a fitting time to examine the nature and accomplishments of the
expanding field of international involvement in intra-state conflicts, and to
consider what researchers might contribute to better understand and improve this
phenomenon.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, a new international attitude began to emerge
toward what were then called “regional conflicts” in the “third world.” Though
many intra-state conflicts had served in part as proxy fights for the two
contending blocs, as the Cold War came to an end, conflicts were no longer
approached as fronts in a worldwide confrontation. Instead, they became viewed
as regional or global problems that should be addressed multilaterally. Various
ad hoc governmental and NGO actors, regional bodies and UN diplomats helped
to mediate the end to internal wars such as in Mozambique and Central America.
If the wars reached peace settlements, the UN and other third parties dispatched
traditional peacekeeping or monitoring forces. This was also done regarding new
violent civil conflicts that erupted, such as in the former Yugoslavia, Tajikistan,
Georgia, Rwanda, Kosovo, and East Timor. Soon they called forth not only
peacekeepers but a growing number of other international governmental and
NGO actors, who implemented a variety of economic, political, and social
programs. During this same period, the international community also extended
conflict prevention initiatives into societies like Macedonia, Kyrgyzstan, and the
Crimean area of Ukraine. Though they had not experienced any recent war, they
were seen as threatened by inter-ethnic or other upheaval.
Most countries that were the focus of these efforts have been small and of little
geo-political significance in the traditional sense. Yet, the aftermaths of what one
insensitive commentary called these “tea-cup wars” and the prospects of future
ones rose unexpectedly throughout the 1990s to a rather high place on the
international agenda. Increasingly, they influenced the diplomacy, development
and military policies and budgets of major powers, other third party states,
multilateral institutions, and non-governmental organizations. The bitter
experiences with the conflicts in Somalia, Bosnia, and Rwanda even made them
into symbols of the international affairs of the final years of the Twentieth
Century. Although most of these conflicts were known mainly to the
professionals whose jobs was to deal with them, the human drama in some of
them eventually led to their becoming the basis for films marketed to mass
audiences.
As the international responsibilities for intra-state conflicts were expanding, key
documents such as Agenda for Peace in 1992 and the “Brahimi Report” in 2000
attempted to conceptualize and legitimate the expanding international mandate in
intra-state conflicts, and to establish some strategic directions. Developments on

2

the ground often fell short of what high level rhetoric and new visions outlined.
Yet in some instances and over time, actual practice not only reflected many of
the principles the documents articulated; it occasionally exceeded or superceded
them.
Examining the status and accomplishments of the emerging forms of
international engagement could easily delve into wide-ranging important issues
and address a host of unresolved questions. At this particular stage in its
development, however, taking on a variety of outstanding concerns may not be
the best way to advance this field. While it is often said that international action
toward conflicts lacks sufficient “political will,” its problem may actually be that a
surfeit of political wills is going off in too many different directions. Energies are
highly dispersed and unfocused. Although the diversity of peacebuilding is a
source of vitality, it also suffers from an overload of problems on the agenda and
a myriad of perspectives from which to view them. What may be most useful
now, both for this paper’s sponsors and peacebuilding as a whole, is not more
controversy but some consolidation.
Accordingly, the main focus of this paper is the clearly stated but still large topic
of what post-conflict peacebuilding has achieved overall and where the IDRC and
its partners could do value-added research work on the subject. The paper
offers a kind of “bottom-line” performance report of the upshot of the deliberate
efforts by the UN and many other actors in the 1990s to rebuild and revive postwar countries. It also highlights developments and accomplishments in the
parallel subject of conflict prevention – meaning international engagement in
countries generally at peace but vulnerable to major violent conflicts -- and its
latest version, “preventive peacebuilding.”
Specifically, the paper:
1. traces briefly the enlarging scope of peacebuilding in post-conflict situations,
as well as the extension of the idea into presumed “pre”-conflict situations
2. reviews some of the main impacts of peacebuilding on the achievement of
sustainable peace in post-conflict settings in particular, at the macro (national)
level
3. identifies factors that comparative research has found to be associated with
relatively effective post-conflict peacebuilding
4. describes basic alternatives to post-conflict peacebuilding and identifies
issues that need to be addressed in order to see whether they are
significantly better

3

5. suggests some fruitful avenues for future research on post-conflict
peacebuilding.1
Regarding these tasks, the paper seeks only to make some basic points, identify
key findings and suggest how this subject might be pursued further. Further
caveats are needed to set out the limits of the paper in relation to peace and
conflict as a whole. It does not take on international conflict, international
development policy, international political economy, or international relations in
general. Nor does it get into the huge empirical literature on the causes of socalled ethnic and other varieties of intra-state conflicts. The latter are discussed
in many studies and incorporated in early warning databases that are readily
available.2 The paper also does not examine specific intra-state or inter-state
conflicts. This also means it does not bear directly on major ongoing conflicts
such as the Israeli-Palestinian, the India-Pakistan, or the Northern Ireland
conflicts, which periodically garner so much of the world’s attention (though
disproportionably to the numbers actually killed). In part because these more
discussed conflicts are waged at high levels of confrontation and occupy globallevel diplomats, they have not been at the center of studies of international “pre”conflict or post-conflict peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The latter activities
tend to apply to “orphan” or marginalized conflicts, where the UN and other
bodies are handed major peacebuilding assignments. We also do not look here
at home-grown activities and institutions that promote peace and help to resolve
conflicts within countries, such as the many projects and initiatives that are in
effect at the local community level.
II.
THE EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION
OF A GLOBAL PEACEBUILDING ENTERPRISE:
FROM EMERGENCY RELIEF TO NATION-BUILDING
Before tackling the evaluative concerns of the paper, it is useful to map the
present boundaries of the peacebuilding activities that have expanded in the
1990s and to define the notion of peacebuilding that has resulted. This broadbrush treatment points out major trends in peacebuilding in terms of the generic
activities it has come to include, and it proposes a resulting operative meaning
for the concept.3
1

This revised version of an earlier draft has benefitted from the detailed and apt comments of
several people within the IDRC network, as well as from the commentators and participants at the
IDRC conference in October, 2002.
2
On the generic questions of causation, there is actually little fundamental disagreement, only
differences in emphasis. Different studies look at different samples, types of conflicts and effects
but many have essentially the same kinds of underlying and more immediate factors on their
respective lists.
3
Although peacebuilding has a small place in the wider domain of international affairs, ideally, a
mapping exercise should do a survey that inventories and quantifies comprehensively the
incidence, scope, scale, and elements of the twenty or so peacekeeping missions that have
increasingly taken on the features of peacebuilding. But because it has grown tremendously over
the past ten years, this limited study does not aspire to describe the exact shape and parameters
of peacebuilding worldwide or describe its many facets. Nor could we synthesize or critique the

4

All in all, though the configuration of activities in each international engagement
in a given country is different, the lively fiction called the “international
community” has exercised wider, deeper and longer involvement in many wartorn as well as war-threatened national societies. One way to trace the
expanding scope of peacebuilding is to sketch how this practice has broadened
laterally in terms of the policy sectors that are implicated, deepened in terms of
engagement with the internal workings of societies, and lengthened in terms of
stages of conflict when it operates.4 These dimensions are explored with regard
to both the “back end” of conflicts and the “front end.”
From Alleviating Human Suffering to Post-Conflict Peacebuilding
As peace settlements were reached after longstanding internal wars (e.g.
Guatemala) as well as in some new conflict areas (e.g. Bosnia, Somalia), the
number of peacekeeping missions undertaken by the UN and other bodies far
exceeded all previous peacekeeping missions since the UN was founded.
Despite their chronic underfunding, this proliferation of peacekeeping was
followed by a process of international mission creep. After the provision of
humanitarian aid to a war’s victims, the mediation of peace accords and the
enforcement of ceasefires, international agencies have gradually taken on many
more tasks in post-conflict areas.
In addition to the reconstruction of the physical infra-structure of a war-torn
country, they have undertaken “track-two” diplomacy, the demobilization and
reintegration of soldiers, election monitoring and assistance, refugee and
displace persons resettlement, democratic institution-building, police training,
economic restructuring, establishment of courts, human rights monitoring,
constitution drafting, anti-corruption campaigns, created financial institutions, civil
society empowerment, civil service capacity-building, security sector reform,
inter-group reconciliation, trauma counseling, professionalization of media, microenterprise development, and mechanisms to address past atrocities. A current
example is the effort in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) to fulfill the
Lusaka peace accords with the assistance of the UN Mission not only by
decommissioning the contending armies and monitoring the truce where it can be
found, but also by arranging for a nation-wide political dialogue that deliberately
aims to mobilize civil society groups as a cross-cutting counterweight to the
contending armed groups.
Observing relapses into conflicts in Angola and Cambodia, for example, but
desiring to limit their military presence and outlays, third party actors have
employed many methods for creating the conditions for a sustainable peace,
through programs that work through but also around a country’s major
vast literature, many theorists, and policy papers that this practical activity has generated over the
years.
4
For other treatments of the evolution of peacebuilding, see Richmond and Chopra.

5

powerbrokers or warlords. This approach has involved a widening range of
global and regional organizations, including states, multilateral agencies, IFIs,
and international NGOs of many varieties, along with domestic counterparts or
so-called “partners.”
Of course, these various activities have not been applied everywhere or followed
a set sequence. But what used to be called just “peacekeeping” in post-conflict
settings has evolved into “second generation peacekeeping,” then transmogrified
into “peace operations,” and now military activities are intricately linked to civil
administration and other functions under the rubric of “post-conflict
peacebuilding.” With the issuing of the Brahimi Report in 2000, the
interdependency of ensuring post-conflict security and achieving broader
peacebuilding was made explicit and more official. Hence, in one analysis, all
these humanitarian, security, political, human rights, civil and governance
functions should simply be called “peace-maintenance.”5 In a similar analysis, a
“third generation of multidimensional approaches to ending conflict… are
becoming increasingly interventionary in nature as a result of the legitimization of
claims for human security.”6
From Post-War Rebuilding to Pre-War Prevention
A similar broadening has occurred in another post-Cold War concept about
international involvement in intra-state conflicts that had its debut in Agenda for
Peace: conflict prevention (or what it called “preventive diplomacy.”). As the
1990s unfolded, more and more intra-state conflicts were being added to the UN
and other organizations’ caseload. Like their predecessors, the newer conflicts
caused immense human suffering, death, and destruction, and required the
intensive kinds of post-conflict peacekeeping and development efforts that we
have just described. The financial costs of humanitarian relief and peacekeeping
in conflict countries were mounting, and the difficulties of doing post-conflict
peacebuilding interventions in war settings were stretching the limited personnel
and other resources as well as the credibility of the UN and the other
organizations who were taking on the messy business of cleaning up and
rebuilding in the aftermaths of intra-state conflicts.
As the political hand-wringing over these demanding burdens increased, more
and more observers turned to the attractive notion of preventing these bloody
and devastating intra-state wars in the first place. This entailed also the
providing of early warning of potential conflicts. The seeming series of new intrastate conflicts that broke out since the early 1990s, and the human suffering and
diplomatic and peacekeeping travails that they each caused over and over again
swayed leaders and organizations to the argument that it would be more costeffective, not to mention more humane, to try to keep as many as possible of
these horrible and costly wars from occurring at all. The concept spread due in
5
6

Jarat Chopra, ed., The Politics of Peace-Maintenance (Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1998)
Richmond, p. 140.

6

part to the widely subscribed premise that social tensions and political disputes
can be addressed more easily before they spiral into destructive violence, than
after major violence has escalated. Conflict prevention was also a response to
the embarassing criticisms of widely publicized failures by the UN and others to
avert escalations of violence such as in Rwanda. When every half-year or so,
another major outbreak followed upon an earlier one, more fuel was added to the
argument for pro-active war prevention, and thus for going beyond primarily
reactive war alleviation, termination, and remediation.
Of course, the interest in post-conflict peace operations already entailed not only
maintaining a peace that has broken out in a post-war society but also preventing
it from re-erupting into violent conflict. But the more distinctive meaning of
conflict prevention tended to focus on places where no violent conflicts have
occurred in recent history, including forestalling the spill-over of already-active
nearby hostilities into new areas.
Agendas Numerous intergovernmental and NGO international conferences and
study groups have taken up conflict prevention in Europe, North America, Africa
and Asia, and several institutes have sponsored policy research on it.7 Although
not a household word – indeed some have called conflict prevention a “best kept
secret” of the post-Cold War era -- conflict prevention is now frequently urged in
the policy statements of major governments, the UN, the EU, and many regional
bodies. The topic of two UN Security Council discussions in 2000 and 2001, a
priority urged in July, 2000 by the G-8 Okinawa Summit, and the focus of a report
of the UN Secretary General in June 2001, conflict prevention has become quite
prominent on the international policy agenda.
Practices and Programs Although it is still not widely realized, this interest in
prevention has progressed considerably beyond exhortation, talk, and research.
It is being consciously practiced more and more through a variety of concrete
initiatives – usually little publicized and not always explicitly referred to as such -in Eastern Europe, Africa, Latin America, Central Asia, and East Asia. In
addition, the UN Secretariat, the European Commission, regional
intergovernmental bodies (e.g. OSCE, OAU, OAS) and sub-regional bodies (e.g.
SADC, IGAD, ECOWAS) have created mechanisms with small units that assign
a few staff to look for early warning signs and consider preventive responses.8
7

Although the NGO, International Alert, has called attention to the need for conflict prevention,
the first post-Cold War project focused exclusively on it (in the sense defined above) may have
been the Preventive Diplomacy Initiative at the US Institute of Peace (USIP) from 1994-1995,
which grew out of a USIP/U.S. State Department Study Group on Preventive Diplomacy from
1993-1994. The subject was subsequently taken up by the Carnegie Commission on Preventing
Deadly Conflict until 1999, the Center for Preventive Action at the Council of Foreign Relations,
from about 1995 to the end of 1999, the Conflict Prevention Network of the Stifftung Wissenschaft
und Politik from 1996 to 2001, and most recently, the International Peace Academy and the
Woodrow Wilson Center.
8
Even ASEAN has addressed the subject informally through the Asian Regional Forum (ARF),
largely under the rubric of inter-state military confidence building measures.

7

These fledgling mechanisms have been used to respond to a few threatening
situations arising in countries, with some at least partial successes such as in
Congo-Brazzaville (1993), and against the attempted executive coups in
Guatemala, Peru, and Venezuela. NGOs have sprouted up that are specifically
dedicated to advocacy, analysis, and action in conflict prevention (e.g. Forum for
Early Warning and Early Response [FEWER], International Crisis Group [ICG]),
and they forward country situation reports to the governmental bodies, often
accompanied by prevention policy recommendations.9
Procedures Furthermore, the procedures in doing early warning and identifying
and implementing appropriate preventive responses are beginning to be
“mainstreamed” in the routine ongoing operations both at the headquarters and
country-mission level of the European Commission, the UN, and other major
multilateral and bilateral development agencies.10 Practical analytical tools have
been developed for early warning and preventive policy responses.11 A series of
week-long training workshops by the UN Staff College since January 1999 has
“graduated” over 900 desk officers from all the major UN agencies, each of
whom have been introduced to issues in conflict analysis and the range of
possible preventive responses. At the UN headquarters level, the Secretariat
now operates a Prevention Team that meets regularly to monitor potential trouble
spots and recommend appropriate action. At the country level, the UN and some
donor and multilateral organizations are trying to establish a regular process of
drawing up country-specific development assistance plans. Examples include
the UN Common Country Assessments (CCA), and the Development Assistance
Framework (DAF), although so far only some such procedures explicitly build in
reducing conflict sources or strengthening peace capacities as planning criteria.
Mainstreaming stems from the idea, not accepted even a few years ago, that
conflict prevention is not a specific policy sector in itself nor a single technique or
method of intervention. It is a pro-active orientation, a potential policy and
bureaucratic “culture of prevention” that ideally cuts across a wide range of major
policy sectors and organizations. Such sectors include not only diplomacy and
conflict resolution (thus the declining usage of the too-narrow “preventive
diplomacy”). They also could include economic development, democracy9

What one book described a decade ago as the „emerging global watch“ seems to be gradually
taking some form. See B.G. Ramcharan, The International Law and Practice of Early Warning
and Preventive Diplomacy: The Emerging Global Watch (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 1991). The
increasing interest that International Crisis Group has show in pre-crisis situations is another
reflection of the general shift toward pro-active responses.
10
For recent developments, see the overview by Manuela Leonhardt in Lund and Rasemoelina,
eds. Op. Cit..
11
The recent trends are surveyed in Manuela Leonhardt’s chapter in The Impact of Conflict
Prevention Policy: Cases, Measures, Assessments (op. cit.), and in her monograph, Conflict
Impact Assessment of EU Development Cooperation with ACP Countries: A Review of Literature
and Practice (International Alert and Saferworld, 2000). An example of such an analytical tool is
Lund and Mehler, et. al., Peacebuilding and Conflict Prevention in Developing Countries (Conflict
Prevention Network, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, 1999), which was prepared for country
desk officers of the European Commission.

8

building, human rights, military affairs, environment, education, health,
agriculture, and so on, as well as commercial activity such as international trade,
finance and natural resource development. In principle, these might be carried
out at the global, regional, national or local levels by any governmental or nongovernmental actor.12 In fact, the UN Secretariat is now seeking to engage
regional organizations, NGOs from civil society, and the business community in
conflict prevention as well. Prevention also of course relies in the first instance
on actors within the affected countries themselves. The title of the 1999 annual
report on the activities of the UN as a whole summed them all up as “Preventing
War and Disaster.”
The effort to spread a culture of prevention through mainstreaming conflict
prevention logically leads to the recognition that in most developing countries that
are now facing strains over transition issues, the “international community” is
already present in various guises in the form of diplomatic missions, development
programs, structural adjustment programmes, trade and commercial activities,
military assistance, and, as we have noted, efforts to promote democracy, human
rights, and civil society. In other words, many actors are already engaged in
places that may be in the early stages of potential conflicts. So it is no longer a
matter of receiving an early warning and then rushing to a Kenya or a Nigeria or
a Kyrgyzstan before a crisis erupts. International actors are already there, and
sometimes in sizeable numbers – helping to dig wells, funding school curricula,
training nurses, teaching good business practices, you name it. It is expected
that a significant difference could be made cumulatively if these multiple
multilateral and domestic efforts were each modified somewhat to address
potential violent conflicts, so their aggregate impact in a given country would
begin to be more “conflict-smart” than is currently the case. Ideally, conflict
prevention might become a rather humdrum matter of re-orienting the analyses
and re-engineering the bureaucratic procedures of many of the diplomatic,
development and other programs and routines that are already operating in
developing countries, so that they serve conflict prevention objectives – on an
ongoing basis and in a more concerted way.13
Already, many efforts in potential conflict settings have been conflict-preventive
in their impact or intent, even though they are not labeled as such, thus receiving
little attention in those terms. One example was the World Bank offer in 2000 to
help fund a land reform in Zimbabwe as its political crisis worsened. One of the
arguments made on behalf of the International Criminal Court and for the War
Crimes Tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda has been that they can deter future
human rights violations, not just prosecute those who have already committed
12

Thus all the hope for prevention does not lie with international action. To the contrary,
domestic forces for peaceful change often exist as well, within and outside governments. In fact,
these are seen as the first line of defense against emerging violent conflicts if they can be
enlisted.
13
See Michael S. Lund, “Not only When, But How: From ‚Early Warning‘ to Rolling Prevention”, in
Peter Wallensteen, ed. Preventing Violent Conflict: Past Record and Future Challenges (Uppsala:
Uppsala University, Department of Peace and Conflict Research, 1998)

9

crimes against humanity. Another example is the very recent efforts of the OAS
Secretary-General, in response to an established OAS procedure, to mediate the
escalating dispute between opponents and supporters of the President in
Venezuela.
Instruments In sum, the same increasingly broadened multi-dimensional style of
international intervention has become applied to preventing conflicts as was
evident in ending them and rebuilding after them. The notion is accepted of a
large policy “toolbox” on which prevention potentially can draw. In places like the
Baltics, Macedonia and Kenya, a variety of dialogues, civil society building,
security sector reform, peace media, and many other programmes are also
integral to the policy toolbox of prevention and other internationally sponsored
programs have been applied to try to mediate the resolution of emerging political
disputes in order to keep them from becoming violent and to strengthen the
capacities of susceptible societies to withstand the threat of mass violence.
Put another way, just as with the evolution of an inclusive concept of
peacebuilding, the definition of conflict prevention or preventive action also has
been deepened and widened. It now includes both structural and interactive (i.e.
diplomatic, official or non-official) means of engaging to keep intrastate or
interstate tensions and disputes from escalating into significant violence, to
strengthen the capabilities to resolve such disputes peacefully, and to alleviate
the underlying problems that produce them. Thus it aims not only at avoiding the
eruption of violence (sometimes called direct, operational, or light prevention),
but also addressing the deeper sources of potential conflicts (sometimes called
structural or deep prevention), and everything in between. In terms of its
methods, conflict prevention can in principle involve the peaceful means of any
policy sector, whether they are labeled prevention or not (e.g. sanctions,
conditional development aid, mediation, structural adjustment, humanitarian
assistance, media, preventive military deployment, democratic institutionbuilding, etc.).
Of course, whether any such means are in fact conflict-preventive depends on
how, when and where they are specifically applied. As the actually operate, they
could in fact be doing the opposite. To be part of the “culture of prevention,”
sectoral policies are not necessarily carried out in the usual ways. So far, most
of the existing international activities are implemented without specific analysis or
intention as to whether they are helping or hurting the larger process at stake of
managing socio-political change without violence. Most policies that are already
at work and the considerable resources that are already being spent in
developing countries are not yet being effectively mobilized specifically for
conflict prevention purposes. Programs are initiated and resources allocated for
many sectoral reasons, but with little thought as to how such choices might be
oriented to preventing violent conflicts, such as by buttressing the peaceful
capacities of these societies to navigate the perils of wrenching change, or at a
minimum, not worsening divisions and tensions. The difference must come when

10

these activities begin to be seen through a “conflict lens” and are modified to give
them a time-sensitivity, a place-sensitivity, an outcome-sensitivity, and an
operational-sensitivity that enhance their impacts on preventing violent or armed
conflicts and on building capacities for peaceful settlement of disputes. A small
but growing field of analysis is evaluating the effectiveness of various such
instruments.14
Norms In addition, although it is ignored most of the time, a new international
norm seems to be emerging that invokes an obligation to respond to potentially
major eruptions of violence, especially genocide. The international climate in
which conflicts are perceived and discussed seems to be accepting the
imperative at the normative level, albeit slowly and tacitly, of engaging early to
keep internal wars from breaking out. As each successive bloody war has hit the
headlines, there is now much less heard about how they are inevitable tragedies
resulting from age-old animosities. Instead, more doubts seem to be publicly
voiced that perhaps the calamity could have been avoided. Questions are asked
about what went wrong and who is responsible. Both UN Secretary General Kofi
Annan and US President Clinton publicly acknowledged in 1998 that their
organizations could have acted earlier to prevent the Rwanda genocide in 1994.
Parliamentary public inquiries have been made in France and Belgium into the
roles that their governments may have played in neglecting or worsening that
14

Instruments such as mediation, negotiations, and sanctions have received libraries of attention,
although not usually from a prevention perspective. A recent book that probes the preventive
value of negotiations, however, is William Zartman, ed. Preventive Negotiations (Rowman and
Little field, 2001). But surprisingly little has been done on the wide range of other possible
preventive measures. Work that has begun to do the latter includes Cortright, David (ed.), The
Price of Peace: The Role of Incentives in International Conflict Prevention, Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, Lanham, MD, 1998); Esman, Milton J., “Can Foreign Aid Moderate Ethnic Conflict?”
Peaceworks, no. 13, (Washington, D.C.: US Institute of Peace, March 1998); Carment, David and
Patrick James, eds. Peace in the Midst of Wars: Preventing and Managing International Ethnic
Conflicts (Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1998); and Ben Reilly, Michael
Lund, et. al., Democracy and Deep-Rooted Conflict: Options for Negotiators (Stockholm, Sweden:
Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, 1998). A forthcoming USAID-funded study
under the Greater Horn of Africa Peacebuilding Project at Management Systems International,
Inc. (MSI) is evaluating the peace and conflict impacts of peace radio, traditional local-level peace
processes, and national “track-two” political dialogues in five countries. Earlier rudimentary
efforts to apply various criteria to evaluate the conflict prevention capacities and limits of nineteen
diverse prevention policy instruments are found in Preventing and Mitigating Violent Conflicts: A
Guide for Practitioners (op. cit.) and Lund, “Impacts of Development Aid as Incentives or
Disincentives in Reducing Internal and Inter-state Conflicts: A Review of Findings from
Documented Experience,” Unpublished report to the Development Assistance Committee (DAC),
Task Force on Peace, Conflict And Development, (OECD), 1998. The case-studies in Do No
Harm: How Aid Can Support Peace – Or War (Lynne Rienner, 1999) and subsequent studies
organized and analyzed by Mary Anderson and her associates at Collaborating for Development
Associates, Inc. are also very relevant here. Some products are putting instrument assessments
into forms that can be used by country desk officers and other practitioners. See, for example,
the brief assessments of election observers, human rights observers, and other instruments in
Lund and Mehler, et. al., Peacebuilding and Conflict Prevention in Developing Countries (op. cit).
A manual of UN „preventive measures“ such as fact-finding missions, humanitarian aid, and local
community economic development is also being prepared for the Framework Team in the UN
Secretariat.

11

horrendous human calamity. A legal suit has been brought by families of victims
of the Rwandan genocide against the UN Secretary General for failing to prevent
it. A Dutch government recently resigned after it was documented that Dutch
soldiers had partly enabled the Sbrenica massacre to occur. Evidently, the
potential for violent conflicts is even beginning to establish some higher moral
and legal stakes for at least the most capable international actors, for they now
may be held more accountable for purported lapses of duty on their presumed
conflict prevention watch (“Daddy, what were you doing before the war?”).
Despite some dramatic failures to act preventively, or perhaps because of them,
an implicit new international code may be receiving gradual acceptance. It
reads: if major violent conflicts are not inevitable and can be prevented with
reasonable effort, international actors are morally bound to act to do what is
possible wherever these situations could very likely lead to massive violence.
Indicatively, the International Commission on Intervention and Sovereignty
recently concluded that the obligation to protect ordinary people at risk for their
lives because their states are unwilling or unable to protect them “implies an
accompanying responsibility to prevent” any likely deadly conflicts.15
None of this is to claim that budgets have shifted significantly from peacekeeping
or post-conflict peacebuilding to conflict prevention, however (pace Mack, 2002),
or that vigorous conflict prevention is now the order of the day. Although
humanitarian and development aid have declined, money explicitly for conflict
prevention most likely has not appreciably increased. And as seen over the last
year regarding Zimbabwe, international efforts still fail to address in a robust way
serious potential breakdowns of whole societies. Although the idea has gained
increasing attention, conflict prevention continues to receive relatively less
attention and resources than post-conflict peacebuilding. Even at this late date,
its rudiments are still just being discovered by many professionals in the larger
field.16 Although “conflict prevention” has become the term of choice by a
widening larger circle where “conflict resolution” or “conflict management” once
served, conceptual and empirical confusion continue about fundamental
differences between potential and post-conflict settings. Oddly, despite similar
concerns and the fact that prevention includes post-conflict settings as well as
potential conflict settings, the people who have worked on post-conflict issues
after all these years tend not to study conflict prevention as we define it here, and
vice-versa.
In short, the nomenclature in this part of the field has become wider and deeper
in meaning, too. For pre-emptive action toward conflicts, Agenda for Peace
resurrected Dag Hammerskjold’s 1960 coinage “preventive diplomacy,” thus
connoting the mediating role of third party emissaries in relation to disputing
15

ICISS, The Responsibility to Protect (IDRC, 2001).
See, e.g. Peter Uvin, “The Development/Peacebuilding Nexus: A Typology and History of
Changing Paradigms”, Journal of Peacebuilding and Development Volume 1, Number 1, 2002,
pp.14-17.
16

12

parties. But now even the UN prefers to use the more inclusive term “preventive
action.” Current discussions of conflict prevention increasingly define its task not
only as using “direct prevention” to particular disputes between emergent parties
in the foreground but also as creating capable states and immunizing societies
against violence through “structural prevention” efforts at many levels in the
background. The term “preventive peacebuilding” is sometimes now used to
suggest that many of the same wide spectrum of sectoral policies that have been
used in post-conflict settings.
A Multi-Dimensional Concept
This discussion could also go into how even in some unresolved mid-conflict
situations international agencies are investing funds to build peace, despite the
fact that armies have not stopped fighting. An illustration is the local civil society
capacity-building efforts in southern Sudan and Somalia. In those settings, the
spectrum that runs from short-term humanitarian relief through transitional
rehabilitation to long-term development has been seriously up-ended.17 But that
would simply give further support to the case we are making here that the upshot
of many international actors’ recent engagements with post-conflict or pre-conflict
situations has been the emergence of an overarching multidimensional concept
of peacebuilding. In essence, the field has arrived at an operating concept of
peacebuilding that calls for addressing all the main sources of past and potential
conflicts, from their historical and structural sources to their immediate
manifestations, and at all stages in their “life-cycle.”18 A unified concept of
deliberate international peacebuilding thus has emerged that is not only multilateral but also multi-sectoral in terms of what the international community should
be doing on the ground, multi-leveled in terms of how much should be done, and
multi-staged, in terms of when the international community should be involved.19
Of course, huge financial and political constraints and policy blindspots still keep
international actors from addressing many conflicts in a timely, adequately17

Whether the latter notion’s ambitiousness is very cost-effective is of course another question
altogether.
18
The idea that conflicts eventually evolve through a “life-cycle” or history, which was long
implied in the UN Charter‘s Chapters VI and VII, was developed more explicitly in Michael Lund,
et.al., Preventing and Mitigating Violent Conflicts: A Guide for Practitioners (Creative Associates
International, Inc., 1997, viewable at www.caii-dc.com/ghai). To clear up the terminological
confusion in the field, the framework presented there took pains to distinguish the differing
moments at which peaceful intervention can occur. These include normal diplomacy/politics,
conflict prevention/preventive diplomacy, crisis prevention, conflict management/peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peace enforcement, and post-conflict peacebuilding/conflict resolution (and one
could add reconciliation). It also suggested that some policy goals and corresponding policy
tools are more appropriate at given stages than others. More recently, differing stages of conflict,
such as emergence, escalation, de-escalation, (re)construction, and reconciliation, have been
adopted as the organizing framework in textbooks in the conflict field (see. e.g. Louis Kriesberg,
Constructive Conflicts: From Escalation to Resolution (Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and
Littlefield, 1998); Hugh Miall, et. al., Contemporary Conflict Resolution (Cambridge, England:
Polity Press, 1999)
19
The aim in pointing out this emergent definition is not to seek to impose it on all practice, but
simply to put into relief the dominant operating assumptions.

13

supplied and coordinated way, especially in countries that are strategically
insignificant to the major powers. Even strategic Afghanistan is not getting the
security protection it vitally needs. Although it is still an ideal that is usually not
fully applied, this robust notion of peacebuilding is now increasingly presumed to
be needed -- and not only for helping countries to limit the spread of a major war
and recover from it as violence declines but also to avoid wars from erupting, and
re-erupting.20 The overall international trend has been toward more and more
engagement at more levels in terminating, mitigating, and increasingly,
preventing, a variety of differing intra-state conflict situations.
One effect of all this is that many new functional and transnational relationships
and professional networks have come into being. Characterizing these
developments in the 1990s as the emergence of a global peacebuilding
“enterprise” is inspired by the way that a multitude of non-profit and for-profit nongovernmental organizations now compete to get contracts, grants, or other
funding in order to implement many of the programmes under the peacebuilding
agenda. A related indicator of the growth of a peacebuilding field is how it has
generated demand for a wide range of new professional skills and expanded the
market for training workshops, and even new graduate programmes and
degrees, in various aspects of conflict analysis, management, humanitarianism
and peacebuilding. A look at the training courses, events and jobs listed in trade
newsletters, for example, reveals the variety of skills that are currently required
and in demand by organizations whose staff run programmes as diverse as
women’s legal advocacy centres and police training. The idea that originally
inspired the US Peace Corps in the 1960s -- to create a people-to-people
program that transfers a variety of skills and capacities to developing countries
has been carried forward in the programs of all the major international donors in
conflict settings. An international version of the Peace Corps has become an
international vocation for thousands of ex-patriots.
From Peacebuilding to Nation-building
The story does not end with the unified concept of pre- and post-conflict
peacebuilding. In the evolution just described, international activities in conflict
areas increasingly have exceeded the aspiration simply to keep and to sustain
peace, in the sense of preventing or avoiding relapse into armed conflict in the
short and long run. In many instances, post-Cold War international engagement
into conflicts virtually has become nation-building. In effect, this activity is
seeking to weave a whole new cloth for the national society and to set up
20

Beyond describing peacebuilding’s overall aims generically and when it comes into the stages
of a conflict, it is no longer especially fruitful to debate which specific instruments or actors are or
are not to be included in peacebuilding. Henning Haugerudbraaten identifies six dimensions on
which various peacebuilding definitions differ: aims, means, timing, actors, part versus whole, and
organization (See “Peacebuilding: Six Dimensions and Two Concepts”). But this paper considers
it useful -- when defining the concept -- to include only the first and third dimensions. Using the
others to define the term either gets into many possible variations and situational differences, or it
begs important policy and empirical issues.

14

unprecedented new forms of governing in the affected countries along with new
rules for economies and politics. Kosovo and East Timor are especially
indicative examples. In a mission to a formerly war-torn developing society, an
international agency could just as likely be sending the president of a national
association of plumbers, a constitutional scholar, a child psychologist, and an
anti-trust consultant as it would a soldier, doctor, teacher, or agronomist. In this
light, the term “reconstruction” in these contemporary post-conflict situations is a
misnomer (as it was also when it came to the political systems transplanted in
Germany and Japan after World War II). It is actually national construction.
In the absence of a compelling alternative theory of development, this nationbuilding cum peacebuilding is based intellectually on the current consensus
around liberal values that prevail among mainly the major Western powers and
are now also deeply ensconced in donor agencies as well as in the UN system,
including not only the World Bank and IMF but smaller development agencies
such as UNDP as well. Most officials and professionals in these organizations
tend to assume that any and all of these liberal values advance peace and
prevent conflict ipso facto, in any context, form and increment in which they can
be applied. In this pervasive world view, market-oriented economic reform,
democratization, civil society building, human rights, rule of law, and good
governance are assumed to be the most promising approach both to preventing
intra-state and inter-state conflicts as well as to developing poor societies and
organizing nations. Findings from research such as that democracies seldom go
to war with each other have become the basis for making societies into
democracies. Every component of liberalism, whether economic reform or war
crimes tribunals, now has a theory of peace and long-term conflict prevention
lying behind it. Since its policy components are often applied in many different
settings in an automatic, one-size-fits-all manner, liberalism has come to fit the
classic definition of an ideology, i.e., a general world view into which many
complex and contradictory facts are squeezed.
The liberal model is most conspicuously grafted onto societies by international
agencies associated with post-conflict peace operations, where the destruction of
many institutions has often left more of an institutional and values vacuum. It is
crucial to identify what theory of development lies behind bilateral, multilateral,
and NGO engagements in the poorest developing societies, and the goals and
values that they pursue, because in those countries, activities that affect national
development get more of their funds from ODA monies, whereas in the smaller
number of more economically successful developing economies, private direct
investment plays a bigger role.21 But the model also drives most international
development activities in developing societies that have not experienced recent
conflicts but are believed to be at risk. If, as some predict, further turmoil occurs

21

Shepard Forman, et.al., Recovering from Conflict: Strategy for An International Response (New
York: Center on International Cooperation, n.d.)

15

in some countries and regions, these international involvements in internationally
sponsored de facto nation-building may continue to ramify.22
At the international level, the liberal paradigm that is being implanted in
developing countries takes the form of spreading normative and economic
regimes that enshrine and seek to promote and/or enforce these same values
and international organizations such as the new International Criminal Court.
The credo of liberal internationalism is globalization’s manifestation on the plane
of societal and political values.
Rethinking Peacebuilding
However, just as the international community has become more intimately
involved in the affairs of more national societies, it is also reaching a more
mature stage of being somewhat more reflective about how it goes about this
work and its wider implications. As the peacebuilding enterprise and the
normative culture of service to human security have become more influential,
doubts are being voiced regarding some fundamental aspects of the new forms
of international intervention that are occurring under the aegis of peacebuilding.
These questions can be divided into two sets of fundamental concerns that
overlap but are distinguishable: the issues of efficacy and legitimacy.
The Issue of Efficacy. The first set of concerns focuses on the huge practical
challenges and difficulties that are entailed in doing the recent peacebuilding
activities in many post-conflict and potential conflict countries. The basic
question is whether peacebuilding in its various forms is really effective, or not.
As post-conflict and potential conflict peacebuilding interventions have been
tried, have they produced more stability and fewer conflicts or are they doing
harm? The largely unanswered question now is whether the many activities of
peacebuilding actually achieve the results that they seek in the countries in which
they are carried out. Despite the documents seeking to explain and legitimate its
expansion, the ambitions of peacebuilding have come about gradually in
response to practical problems and events. It still constitutes a huge, hopeful
experiment whose results are not clear.
Certain recent developments and events have stimulated this pressure for
greater attention to the evaluation of what is effective and thus more
accountability in conflict interventions. These events included errors of omission
and missed opportunities such as the reversals or setbacks in international postconflict missions that were at one time celebrated as successes (e.g. Angola,
Cambodia, Rwanda). For example, the two worst humanitarian emergencies of
the 1990s, Angola in 1993 and Rwanda in 1994, followed failed peace

22

On the linkiing of liberalism and conflict engagements, see also Oliver Richmond, Maintaining
order, Making Peace (Houndsmill: Palgrave, 2002).

16

agreements; more people died after those agreements failed than had died in the
previous civil wars.23
The events that have given pause also include errors of commission such as the
unintended consequences of ostensibly preventive or peacebuilding actions,
such as conferring diplomatic recognition on Croatia in 1991 without
guaranteeing its security, and failing to vigorously enforce aid conditionalities in
Rwanda in 1993-94.24 Increasing questioning of whether humanitarian aid often
has adverse effects on conflicts, such as in the maintaining of the Hutu
Interhamwe militants in the refugee camps of eastern Zaire from 1994 to 1997,
after their exodus from Rwanda, has also influenced discussion of
peacebuilding.25 A similar question is whether internationally-promoted
majoritarian elections in highly divided societies in the interest of democracy can
increase the risks of violent backlash by factions who see themselves losing.26
For example, the violence that broke out in Burundi in October 1993, a few
months after a multi-party democratic election had put in office its first Hutu
president, escalated further and has waged on ever since, causing many more
deaths than all the previous outbreaks of inter-ethnic violence put together during
Burundi’s earlier, more authoritarian post-independence years. Empirical studies
of both early warning and conflict prevention have also aroused concern by
suggesting that international preventive interventions that are half-hearted may
be interpreted by determined oppressors as a go-ahead signal that they can
carry out more oppression with impunity.27
Still other concerns arise from the lack of rigor in the strategies behind
interventions and the lack of attention to whether results are really being
obtained. For example, recent program evaluations contracted by funding
agencies and foundations who are concerned whether their money is being wellspent are revealing in some instances the limitations of frequently used and wellmeaning types of initiatives such as NGO ‘track two’ diplomacy.
Overall, these sobering experiences have led to a deeper awareness that
existing policies and actions by international community inevitably become part
and parcel of the factors that determine the course and outcomes of conflicts,
and often can worsen the situation.28 We speak here not about the important
question of the possible harmful effects of many policies that are not usually
explicitly intended to build peace, such as international arms sales, the diamond
trade, protectionist policies, or structural adjustment programs, but only about
23

Stedman, p. 668-9
See for example, the joint evaluation of the international engagement in Rwanda, Vol I.
25
See, for example, Mary B. Anderson, Do No Harm: How Aid Can Support Peace – or War
(Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1999).
26
See for example, Ben Reilly, “Voting is Good, Except When It Guarantees War,” Washington
Post, Sunday, October 17, 1999, Page B2.
27
See studies by Barbara Harff.
28
See for example, Peter Uvin, Summary Report to the DAC Task Force on Peace and
Development, OECD, page 4.
24

17

those actions that are deliberately aimed at peacebuilding and conflict
prevention. As a result, evaluation methods that have long been used to assess
the impacts of development and other programs are now being developed in
various forms in order to be applied to peacebuilding initiatives. These “peace
and conflict impact assessments,” on the analogy with environmental impact
assessments, are seeking to generate “best practices” and learn lessons from
recent experience.29
This question of efficacy thus remains a challenge to peacebuilders even though
they can still also validly argue that a fundamental problem that affects their
ability to be effective is the chronic lack of sufficient resources that are typically
forthcoming from the international community to address post-conflict situations.
For the point is that even when actions are taken with some level of resources,
the policy choices made may have contributed to worsening the situation.
In sum, in both potential- and post-conflict interventions, policymakers and fieldlevel practitioners are now increasingly expected, not simply to launch initiatives
and run programs and projects, but also to be accountable for getting tangible
positive results in achieving the ultimate goal of a sustainable peace, not
withstanding the modest international resources that are available. More interest
is being shown in finding ways to approach conflicts that: a) at a minimum, “do no
harm” by taking care in changing vulnerable societies not to inadvertently
increase the risks of destructive conflict, and b) if possible, “do some good” by
deliberately and sensitively fostering peaceful and constructive political conflict
and avoiding violent destructive expression of the inevitable clashes between
interests during a period of strife.
The Issue of Legitimacy. The previous concern largely assumes that the
expansive notion of peacebuilding that is emerging is desirable in principle, and it
asks whether it is working well and how it might be improved. A second set of
concerns questions the basic validity of the peacebuilding enterprise, in view of
the depth and quality of the peace that is being achieved even in the best cases
when peacebuilding might be quite feasible. It also raises questions about the
tutelary nature of peacebuilding.
This issue has arisen more sharply in the last few years, in part as a response to
the realization that peacebuilding-become-nation-building is mainly guided by the
principles of liberalism. The concern here is not only that peacebuilding may not
always “work”, but that it mainly serves the interests of the most powerful states
that lie behind its values and promote them.30 Given globalization and other
dominant world trends, are the essential goals and norms that are being
29

See for example, Anneke Galama and Paul van Tongeren, eds. Towards Better Peacebuilding
Practice: On Lessons Learned, Evaluation Practices and Aid and Conflict (European Centre for
Conflict Prevention, 2002).
30
A related recent criticism is that the trend to link humanitarian aid more closely to various
agendas for political change sacrifices its essence as morally neutral aid to people in need. See
David Rieff.

18

implemented in the peacebuilding enterprise reflecting the most desireable forms
and values for developing nations and a global society? Whether or not
peacebuilding has been generally effective in achieving stability or prolonged
peace, this perspective questions the extent to which it is actually leading to
greater general and sustainable improved standards of living, self-determination,
social equality and human dignity – in short, wider panoply of dimensions of
human security. Some question whether the idea that the developing world
needs more capacity in conflict resolution and conflict prevention, for example, is
an immense rationalization on the part of wealthy nations for their unwillingness
to put substantial resources into promoting development in the poorest nations.
Instead of creating new dynamic forms of national societies or a better world
society that empowers ordinary people to take control of their lives and fosters
social justice, some post-conflict peacebuilders are asking if they are merely
being enlisted as the “social workers” of a world system that provides palliatives
to alleviate the suffering of peoples who are forced to endure the worst economic
and social costs of globalization, and in the bargain, are made aid-dependent.
Critics wonder whether the main driving forces that shape world economics and
politics are making the world not so much “safe for democracy” as convenient for
multi-national corporate profitmaking. What has the veneer of multilateral action
and international legitimacy is regarded as the vanguard of global capitalism
because the UN, World Bank and other international organizations are regarded
as dominated by the US and other Western powers, who themselves are
ultimately beholden to multi-national corporations. Such attitudes have become
most visible in the anti-globalization demonstrations at meetings of the WTO, the
IMF, and the Davos Economic Forum, and echoes of this sentiment were heard
as a part of the explanation for the September 11th attacks, although the
perpetrators of the latter are not opposed to economic markets. That this is not
entirely or even at all a “Southern” perspective is seen in its expression by
“Northern” analysts.31
The suspicion that hidden agendas of the major power basically animate
peacebuilding has grown not only as its liberal premises become more exposed
but also in response to recent exercises in “humanitarian intervention.” The
peace enforcement action in the name of humanitarianism in Kosovo was
criticized for its heavy-handedness and underlying service to Western interests
and the agendas of certain organizations. More recently, two post-September
11th policies of the United States have caused alarm as they began to adopt
some of the terminology of nation-building and peacebuilding but took it to
another level of intervention. After the war against the Taliban in Afghanistan
was undertaken, the Bush administration was no longer reluctant to use the term
“nation-building” to describe what was needed in Afghanistan after the Taliban
were ousted. In connection with its avowed determination to force Saddam
Hussein to turn over or destroy all weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, the
Administration introduced a radically new version of pro-active conflict
31

See the writings of Mark Duffield.

19

prevention, i.e., launching preventive war now in order to pre-empt expected
wars later. It also invoked the notion of peacebuilding by publicly considering
various options for achieving post-conflict national construction after a postHussein “regime change.” Such arguments have been buttressed by frequent
references to why Hussein ought to be overthrown because he had oppressed
his own people. Thus it is not surprising that, accurately or not, the notion has
been more widely expressed that the new concepts of peacebuilding may
inevitably be followed by military intervention by major powers for their own
purposes.
The agenda of peacebuilding also received a post-September 11th boost of
uncertain direction from those who see marginalized societies and failing states
as the breeding grounds for terrorists and thus look to the development and
democratization of these societies as necessary to “drain the swamp.” In
response to the war on terrorism, the US and other donors’ are pumping new
infusions of development funds into areas such as Central Asia, the Horn of
Africa, and rural Georgia. An interventionist tone is also emitted by those
observing that non-democratic Middle Eastern regimes provide support to
zenophobic and militant forms of political Islam. To some, the end of ideology
which was supposedly followed by an end of history in which violent political
struggle was no longer required, now seems to have given way to a liberal
triumphalism that is vanquishing its opponents.
In view of these most recent trends, as well as the future of conflict, it is unclear
whether peacebuilding is here to stay for a while or is a passing phenomenon.
The question is open as to whether peacebuilding is still relevant in a post- 9/11
world, at least politically. Whether the anti-terrorist agenda will now skew or
subvert the decade-long process of formulating a multi-dimensional concept of
peacebuilding and nation-building, or instead it will be tempered by them, is a
crucial question that needs to be tracked, not pre-empted.
Looking at the world’s prospects for future conflicts over land, water, population
pressures and a host of other forecasted problems would suggest that an even
more robust multi-dimensional and non-violent version of preventive
peacebuilding would be essential to continue to promote, albeit in tailored forms
for differing contexts.
In any case, the increasing saliency of peacebuilding is putting it under pressure
to demonstrate its real worth from at least two differing directions. As the new
global peacebuilding enterprise has come into being, some of its practitioners
have begun to express a desire to achieve more professionalism in what they
do.32 Others, including some from within the would-be profession, wonder aloud
if it should be professionalized at all, if its ultimate goals are still murky and its
actual consequences are possibly harmful. While the one view regards more
peacebuilding efficacy as valid but does not see it working, the other tends to
assume peacebuilding is working but questions its values and methods.
32

See, e.g. Anneke Galama and Paul von Tongeren, eds.

20

Whatever direction peacebuilding may be heading in the coming years -- up or
down, right or left -- it is useful to pause to take stock of what it hath wrought so
far. The following section reviews one important empirical research literature that
has attempted to derive some data-based findings regarding whether postconflict peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions have been effective and under
what conditions. The subsequent section discusses major alternatives to postconflict peacebuilding, albeit more briefly, including the question of the legitimacy
of liberal peacebuilding.
III.

THE RESULTS OF POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING:
A HARD LOOK AT WHAT WE KNOW

In trying to meet critics, the peacebuilding field is often its own worst enemy. In
much peacebuilding discussion and documents:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Terms are often poorly defined and the discussion of issues is imprecise;
Emotive appeals are widely relied on as argument. Pieties are uttered
without solid evidence about whether and where they may apply as
reliable guidelines (e.g. “allow the parties to own the conflict” and “be
inclusive”);
Platitudes and truisms are invoked as if they provide specific guidance to
action, such as “look at the situation” (look at what? with what questions?)
and “coordinate activities” (when? with whom? about what?);
Careful reasoning is not followed from diagnosis of defined problems to
outlining and assessing possible responses;
Solutions chase problems rather than the other way around. The sectoral
agendas of particular organizations and institutions decide what they do in
particular places rather than that being dictated by the situation on the
ground. It is supply driven, not demand driven.
Intentions are confused with actual results. The forms that peacebuilding
action takes are not specified and classified so systematic observations of
actual results can be made;
Energies are dispersed in hundreds of different directions but the myriad
of activities is not guided by any underlying grounded theory or overall
strategy, only vague assumptions.
Explicit criteria and indicators are rarely stated as to the aims of
peacebuilding and what they would look like concretely if actually
achieved. A systematic method is often not followed for gathering data on
whether such results are obtained;
Though the several values peacebuilding seeks to achieve are not always
consistent with one another, because all have their own normative appeal,
all are advocated, but without a sense that priorities need to be set among
them and necessary tradeoffs must be faced. Everything can be achieved
everywhere.

21

•

Distinctions are often not made about the very different scales and levels
on which conflict as well as peacebuilding activity operates, such as
between local community environments and the environments of national
politics, and thus the very different consequences that can be expected
from efforts at those differing levels;

Overall, the discourse one hears at public peacebuilding events is largely a
Tower of Babel of differing options being hawked in a sprawling policy bazaar.
While technical material on specific programs and budgets abounds, it is largely
descriptive and promotional. NGO and government agency newsletters take on
the role of public relations to keep up financial support.
Most of these tendencies boil down to a common reluctance to carefully observe
and evaluate what is actually being done in relation to basic goals, although there
are exceptions. The bulk of what is written down in this field describes the
various activities that are carried out, what aims are intended by them, and what
various practitioners believe about the value of what they are doing.33 A vast
“grey” literature that is largely advocacy in nature includes liberalism-inspired
menus of the tasks to be done in post-conflict peacebuilding,34 but it offers little
close analysis of first what is needed to be done in specific situations overall, and
the actual detailed workings, let alone consequences, of peacebuilding efforts
and their interactions. Little work has been done to apply rigorous methods of
systematic evaluation research to ascertain whether there actual measureable
results and why they were or were not obtained, i.e., to detemine just what is
being accomplished in terms of explicit notions of desired impacts.
Even when results are projected through methods such as a logical framework or
actual peace and conflict impact evaluations are done, they generally focus at
the micro-level of programs or projects, not the macro-level of the overall
outcomes in a country. Little attention is paid to what kinds and combinations of
interventions actually have various vaunted impacts, what side effects they may
have, and what conditions and features are necessary for them to perform well.
The single unifying element of all this well-intentioned activity is apparently the
overall theme of “peace” as a goal, however defined. Apparently, much of the
field is driven mainly by a moral commitment to this worthy but vaguely defined
ideal, captured in honorific terms such as “peacebuilding” itself. Peacebuilding is
thus approached largely as an expressive activity, i.e. a way to stand for and
promote certain ideals, rather than an instrumental activity, that is a way to
actually achieve specific goals. Given the relative dearth of solid assessments of
results, it may be that peacebuilders are assuming that because their cause is
morally valid, that alone justifies its pursuit and absolves the field of responsibility
for examining the soundness of its operations. Similarly, the primacy placed in
33

See for example, Kumar, ed.; Quaker United Nations Office, Peacebuilding in War-Time
Societies: Workshop Report, December, 1996.
34
USIP. See also Forman, Appendix 4.

22

peacebuilding circles on the norms of consultation and consensus may often
come in conflict with the need for objective, methodically-derived knowledge
based on relevant expertises, and thus many supposed conclusions that emerge
are at best a most common denominator, and at worst, pooled ignorance.
Perhaps one reason for this general lack of rigor in peacebuilding was that it was
part of a larger trend in the 1990s to put new goals on an emerging world
agenda, such as was done through the various global summits on the
environment, children, women, and development. But to project a number of
desirable goals for the world as a whole is not to fashion a realistic and coherent
strategy for any particular country, or to take into account contexts of conflict.
Another explanation for the lack of rigor may be that the discussion of
peacebuilding is tied in too closely with the policy concerns of particular groups of
decisionmakers in various governmental and non-governmental agencies, with
specific expectations of particular funders, and with the daily operational
questions facing practitioners working on specific projects in the field or activists
on the ground. There seems to be little interest in or room for examining the
validity of the theory or theories that may be implicitly driving the whole process
and in developing a data-based intervention strategy.
However, as the saying goes, “any practical pursuit is only as good as the theory
on which it is based.” Clearly, we must look more critically at the actual record of
peacebuilding to assess how well it has performed in its overall thrusts in
comparison to what is assumed to be happening. This may be as important for
dispelling self-doubts and uncovering unknown accomplishments as it is for
addressing external criticism. In an attempt to get a handle on how to move
forward in an informed way, a variety of conceptual frameworks for parsing the
field into manageable issues to tackle in analysis have been developed and
published, but few have been followed to the next step of being used to structure
systematic research.35
To make some solid headway in finding out about what has or has not been
achieved by peacebuilding, we can state the fundamental issues facing the field
in the form of distinct and explicit questions that lead to testable propositions that
can be addressed empirically by gathering relevant knowledge. Those basic
questions seem to be:

35

One attempt to bring some order out of the chaos through constructing a framework that
deconstructs and reconstructs basic analytical elements in the conflict and peace field such as
causes of intra-state conflicts, the levels and stages of conflict, the alternative instruments for
intervening into conflict, and the value criteria by which one might judge the results of such
interventions is found in a primer on conflict analysis and prevention that was prepared for
development practitioners: Michael Lund, et.al., Preventing and Mitigating Violent Conflicts: A
Guide for Practitioners (Creative Associates International, Inc., 1997, viewable at www.caiidc.com/ghai).

23

1. To what extent is post-conflict peacebuilding achieving the various goals of
security, democracy, development, and dignity, or is it making things worse?
2. To the extent that this peacebuilding does achieve its goals, what factors -- in
the way it is done and in the context in which it is done -- are associated with
those results so that it can be improved?
3. In view of its performance, is post-conflict peacebuilding better or worse than
the main alternative ways for dealing with violent conflict in developing
societies?
In the remainder of this section, we review some sources that have addressed
the first two questions. Question #3 is addressed in the subsequent section.
Question #1: Is post-conflict peacebuilding working?
This first question concerns whether peacebuilding is actually achieving its
ostensible goals of achieving peace in various senses of the term. This question
is often confused with the question of how to do peacebuilding better. Practical
advice abounds for practitioners in answer to the latter question, usually
regarding how to carry out various specific functions at a sectoral or subsectoral
level, but not at macro (national), regional, or global levels. While answering the
“how to” question obviously can be useful, it presumes that peacebuilding is
worth doing, whereas the former question holds off on drawing that conclusion.
Glib statements are often made about whether this or that approach to peace
building works or not that are really about how to do it better.
A related confusion arises from what is the “it.” Whether peacebuilding works or
not can be answered in as many different ways as there are people involved in
doing it at many different levels. Peacebuilding activity could mean, for example,
individual actions, local projects, a given agency’s programs, the total range of
outside and insider actions that are devoted to a conflict situation, and global
human rights regimes. Thus, in asking about any “lessons learned,” one
requirement for reaching a meaningful answer is to stipulate which level and unit
of activity one is talking about, and therefore for analysis. Very different answers
are likely to come out depending on the level and kind of activity that is being
assessed, not to mention the differing specific settings in which activities are
applied and the different criteria by which they are being judged.36
To establish some grounding for cumulative knowledge building, this section will
look at peacebuilding’s overall accomplishments – the “whether” question – by
reviewing one major research genre and the particular unit of activity/analysis it
focuses on. One of the rarely coherent corpuses of research in the field has
36

See the brief outline of current approaches to learning lessons in Anneke Galama and Paul van
Tongeren, eds. Towards Better Peacebuilding Practice: On Lessons Learned, Evaluation
Practices and Aid and Conflict (European Centre for Conflict Prevention, 2002).

24

evaluated the implementation and impacts of international peacekeeping and
peacebuilding interventions that are carried out on a national scale in postconflict situations. The bulk of this work has been done by political scientists or
economists who have followed one or other of the following methods:
1. studying a large number of cases (sometimes into the 100s) of post-conflict
peacebuilding in the post-World War II or post-Cold War periods through
large “n” statistical analysis of the correlations of conflict features, intervention
characteristics, and various results
2. examining a much smaller set of cases (e.g., 3-10) and describing them in
considerable depth, sometimes through the method of structured, focused
comparison, and
3. examining a single country case, often not using any comparative framework.
Reflecting one of the virtues of academic research, examples of this genre are
often cumulative, for the authors feel obliged to review previous research and to
test explicitly-stated hypotheses with specified methods for collecting data.
Criteria for Measuring “Sustainable Peace:” A Sliding Scale
To make use of this research to discover peacebuilding’s evident achievements,
we first need to set out explicit criteria or benchmarks by which “peace” can be
defined and thus its achievement might be measured. Presumably, those criteria
should include at a minimum the ending the level of armed conflict and
widespread violence that characterized a war. Such a criterion of general
physical security would mean that large numbers of people in the society have
virtually no likelihood that they will be killed or threatened by major armed conflict
or collective violence. But criteria for ascertaining whether peace has been
achieved and thus post-conflict peacebuilding is effective cannot be limited to this
single notion of security. They should also include the achievement of conditions
that are required to sustain such security and to reduce threats to security to a
virtual impossibility.
But what other conditions are needed for such a “sustainable peace”? A fruitful
approach is to look to the elimination or reduction of the major known causes of
intra-state armed conflicts, direct and indirect, as they have been identified so far
from empirical research. These causes could include “structural” societal
conditions that tend to persist over the long run, such as competition over
resources;37 chronic institutional and policy weaknesses such as widespread
corruption and other signs of weak states and unresponsive polities, and finally,
more immediate factors and fortuitous events that arise in the short term to spark
37

An example of tendentious discourse in the field is how these structural factors are often called
“root” causes. That terminology itself begs the question of causation by implying that certain
factors somehow have greater influence than other types of causes and may dominate other
factors. But which causes are most powerful and how they relate to each other is an empirical
question that can only be determined in particular cases and generalizing from many cases.

25

violence, such as incendiary conflict entrepreneurs. The evaluation of whether
peacebuilding is effective would look at the extent to which – particular places
and times -- it has reduced these particular factors that can lead up to intra-state
conflicts or to relapsed major violence in post-conflict settings.38 In other words,
the factors that have emerged from empirical research into the causes of
conflicts can be recast as factors that would need to be reduced if the likelihood
of relapsed conflicts is minimized, i.e., sustainable peace is to be achieved. This
leads us to a relatively manageable list of things to look at.
To illustrate how typical conflict causal factors can be posited as criteria that
successful post-conflict peacebuilding would needs to achieve, we list below
some key categories. These are arranged in a sliding scale from more
immediate conditions to deeper and more long-term ones, as follows:
1. Absence of actual or threatened widespread physical violence from armed
force, including repression (“mere peace”)
2. Accommodative political processes that allow access to decisions affecting
the population’s lives and provide mechanisms for addressing social
grievances of the kind that otherwise could produce major upheavals
3. Functioning government sufficient to provide essential public services,
including security
4. Sufficient economic development to discernibly improve the well being of
most people in the society and begin to reduce widespread poverty.
5. Absence of egregious social divisions and material inequalities.
But while these criteria are grounded in empirical research on the main causes of
violent conflicts, the notion of what is “peace” attracts almost as many meanings
as the numbers of people who utter the word. That spectrum ranges from the
idea that “to achieve peace, prepare for war” to the belief that “the peace of God
lies within you.” For achieving sustainable peace in post-conflict societies, many
people want to go beyond evidence-based criteria and include many other
preferred values and ideals, such as:
•
•
•

Absence of widespread crime and social dislocations
Restitution for or acknowledgment of past wrongs to promote social
healing and inter-group reconciliation
Increased gender equity.39

It is laudable to wish to improve society by eliminating as many of its deficiencies
as possible and solving its many problems. Many such goals may be essential
38

Though whether the original causes of intra-state conflict are also the most likely causes of
post-conflict violent relapse is a largely unresearched question. The issues and causes of conflict
themselves not only increase but usually change as violent conflicts progress. An issue that
tends to be more prominent in post-conflict settings, for example, is the legacy of bitterness that
past violence creates, and the policy question thus arising of how to deal with the guilty.
39
This objective is, in fact, codified in UN Security Council Resolution 1325(2000).

26

for achieving a whole and healthy nation. However, such an approach risks
making peacebuilding into a grab bag of unfulfilled human wants. It also may
move the goalposts beyond expectations that usually are used to justify postconflict peacebuilding missions. Strictly speaking, it is not clear from the state of
empirical research on intra-state conflict that the latter conditions and other ideals
like them are essential for achieving a sustainable peace, if one thinks of that in
more realistic terms. In the actual practice of post-conflict peacebuilding, it often
seems that what are deemed causes of conflict that need to be eradicated in the
name of overcoming wars and sustaining peace are empirically not causes of
potential violent conflict at all. What they may be instead are the a priori policy
and program goals that international agencies have adopted and are bringing to
post-conflict settings. Or they may be social aspirations or political programs of
groups within the societies that are experiencing post-conflict problems and
policies. In either case, solutions are being presented as problems; the cart has
been put in front of the horse. These may be required for long-term
development, but not for peacebuilding. Just because peacebuilding would
tackle many structural conditions that negate the peaceful life of a community
does not mean that peacebuilding means eliminating every bad thing that is
afflicting society and achieving every one of its esteemed values. Criteria of
“negative peace” will gradually shade into criteria of “positive peace” that
measure how far one is from reaching a good or ideal society. But we cannot
reasonably use a completely open-ended notion of the attributes in a society that
are to be expected from post-conflict peacebuilding if that gives it the burden of
fulfilling all unmet social and human needs -- whether or not those needs are
causes of intra-state conflict.
Peacebuilding and development overlap at their boundaries, but they are not the
same. Development efforts can accompany peacebuilding efforts in a given
setting, and in many instances, the two kinds of activities and goals are
congruent. But some conceptual distinction needs to be preserved, or
peacebuilding becomes any good thing, and on the other hand, all development
can be justified as necessary for peace. Both assumptions are misleading.
Peacebuilding has to be distinguishable from development and other agendas.
The muddling of the difference between peacebuilding and development is not
simply an abstract, idle concern but could result in practical problems. The most
important factors driving potential conflict may not be addressed. The best may
become the enemy of the good. It also raises legitimacy questions because
much more is being loaded onto the international mandate than was bargained
for in terms of peacebuilding.
Thus, the question is whether we should include these other values as criteria for
evaluating peacebuilding, or instead, place them in a different category. They
could be elevated to a higher normative plane where more expansive visions
regarding ideal societies are contemplated. When it comes to defining the
achievements of post-conflict peacebuilding, some limit needs to be put on the
concept of peace by which the results of post-conflict peacebuilding are to be

27

measured. A line needs to be drawn between peacebuilding and maximizing the
various levels of social, economic and political development possible in a given
society. Otherwise, if the term peacebuilding becomes a synonym for all the
positive things we would want to include in development in order to reduce any
and all of a society’s ills, it becomes useless for guiding knowledge gathering and
practical purposes.
“Human Security” This need to distinguish short term and vital goals from longer
term and less pressing goals also points to a possible danger in subsuming
peacebuilding under a superordinate standard of “human security.“ The latter
concept has been put forward primarily as an antidote to the conventional notion
that deciding levels of security in the world is only a matter to be judged by states
and their leaders. “Human security” puts the focus on the security of the
individual human being not only of states. But what has also occurred in the
process of developing this notion is that its content has been enlarged to include
every imaginable limitation on an individual sense of well-being, including
psychological states of mind.40 Also, these criteria are being proposed as a
global touchstone by which the performance of all national development should
be judged, whether the countries concerned are affected by or vulnerable to
major violent conflicts or not.
As the concept of peacebuilding expanded in meaning, it is not surprising that a
further conceptual step would be taken to define a wide range of social,
economic, political, and cultural goals and values as the essential ingredients
that should be included in a comprehensive notion of what it is to achieve
international security. But using such an extensive criterion for making policies in
the developing world runs the risk of ignoring those societies or areas within
them that are the most susceptible to one of the most basic threats to human
beings’ well-being: immediate death of large numbers of people at the hands of
others. Violent conflict becomes just one of many goals to be pursued in the
interest of achieving a whole array of ambitious goals for all developing societies.
But if this whole positive agenda is sought at the same time in the full sense and
everywhere, even though many such ideals go way beyond what is needed to
maintain stability and some movement toward positive development,
peacebuilding as human security could end up achieving none of these values.
There is of course nothing wrong with wanting developing countries to achieve a
multi-dimensional condition of human security – freedom from poverty and
disease, adequate education, etc. But while that standard rightly sets the sights
high in terms of what should be ultimately achieved for the whole developing
world, it may tend to shift attention away from the smaller number of societies
within that universe which conflict analysis would identify as being on the edge
of being torn apart by widespread violence. Aspiring to achieve a high level of
general development for everyone everywhere may detract from the more urgent
task of protecting the most vulnerable people from a massive loss of life due to
40

See CERTI.

28

the basic breakdown of their societies. In those places, the “human security”
paradigm does not provide one with a strategy for deciding where to begin, and
in the confusion, might instead do harm. To anticipate some of the findings
reported below, it is possible that in some places some values (i.e. goals) need to
be achieved to a greater degree before other values can be achieved in those
places.
In sum, seeking to preserve a distinction among differing priorities for
peacebuilding, one is not giving up on those other ultimate goals. The broader
goals may be very desirable for other reasons but it is best to call their pursuit by
another name than “peacebuilding.” The focus is simply being limited in order to
accomplish a certain imperative practical purpose: trying to keep large numbers
of human beings from killing others and being killed.
Findings on the Impacts of Post-Conflict Peacebuilding
Having set aside some ideals as evaluative criteria for determining peacebuilding
efficacy, we turn to look at what a certain sample of recent multi-case empirical
research has discovered about the extent that post-conflict peacebuilding has
succeeded -- using results criteria that arise from conflict analyses. This
research genre has looked at many post-conflict instances where a major intrastate violent conflict has reached some significant reduction of the use of armed
force or political violence and a some peace agreement has been agreed, and
where the UN or other body has established peacekeeping and a varying range
of other missions in order to enforce the peace, avoid recurrence of violence, and
begin to move the country toward self-government and economic development.
Absence of actual or threatened widespread violence. A number of studies of
multiple peace agreements come to the conclusion that the record of recent
peacebuilding has been quite mixed. Hampson (1996) was one of the first to
evaluate peace agreements to find out what makes for their effective
implementation. His study of five agreements does not look specifically at what
ends violence, but at the fulfillment of agreed-on peace agreements, in which
ceasefires and laying down of arms often appear. He concludes that Namibia
and El Salvador operations were successful, while Cambodia was a partial
success and Cyprus and Angola failed. Stedman et. al (2002) search for
instances of sustainable peace among nine cases of post-conflict peace
agreements implemented by the UN and other actors, such as in Somalia;
regional organizations, such as ECOMOG in Liberia; and individual states, such
as India in Sri Lanka. Using the criterion of whether there has been a reduction
or recurrence in violence and the achievement of self-enforced restraint, he and
his co-investigators rank Namibia at the top; El Salvador, Mozambique and
Cambodia in the middle; and Angola and Rwanda at the bottom.
In the most comprehensive study of post-conflict peacebuilding, Sambanis and
Doyle look at 124 cases of civil wars since 1945 to determine how many ended in

29

peace and through what means. They apply both a “lenient” and a “strict” or
more demanding definition of sustainable peace. The lenient criterion refers to
the absence of major or lower-level violence and uncontested sovereignty two
years after the end of the war. In those terms, they find 53 peace successes and
71 failures, a success rate of about 43%. Other researchers reach similarly
mixed conclusions. Table 1. summarizes the case rankings of several studies.
Table 1.
How Various Studies Rank Peace Operations’ Effectiveness
(success, partial success, or failure in controlling large-scale violence)
Post-Conflict
Case
Angola
Bosnia

Durch

Stedman

Hampson

Paris41

failure
failure

failure

failure
failure

Cambodia

failure

failure
partial
success
partial
success

partial
success
failure

partial
success

success

failure
partial
success

Cyprus
E Slavonia
El Salvador
Guatemala

partial
success
success

success
success

Bertram

success
failure
Success (?)
success

partial
success

Haiti
Lebanon
Liberia
Mozambique
Nicaragua
Namibia
Rwanda
Somalia
Sri Lanka
Zimbabwe

Sambanis/
Doyle42
failure
failure

success
success
Success (?)

failure
success
success

success
failure
success
success

success
failure

success
failure

success

failure
failure

success
partial
success
success
failure

failure
success
success
success
failure

success
success (sic)
failure
success
failure

Though they differ in rating some of the missions, these several studies sort out
successes from failures quite consistently. Except for a few like Cambodia
where differing interpretations are given, there is considerable agreement about
those countries where the minimum notion of peace has been achieved and
where it has not. Post-conflict peacebuilding has produced positive results in
41

But using varying criteria for each including economic growth, reduced crime, social inequality,
reduced “social tensions”, etc.
42
Using lenient and strict criteria involving both the absence of violence and political openness.

30

some places, but as many or more have been failures. Thus, peacebuilding
effectiveness in terms of the absence of violence is not a yes or no matter. Quite
different outcomes resulted from different cases, and success and failure each
showed some gradations. That the overall picture is quite mixed, even on the
most uncontested peacebuilding criterion of ending the threat of major violence,
is an important finding.
Accommodative political processes. Surprisingly, once we have examined the
many studies that take an interest in the restoration of minimum physical
security, it is much harder to find rigorous, data-based analyses of the other
desired outcomes of macro-level peacebuilding, especially using comparative
data across several countries. Durch, et. al (1997) and Sambanis and Doyle
(2000) are among the few multi-case cross-national researchers who use
somewhat more expansive criteria of peace that specifically look for increased
political openness or elements of democratization.
Durch and his colleagues use the richest definition. An “effective transition” is
not only the absence of military conflict and of significant disruptions of public
security, but also the survival of the political system through a second election.
They identify various indicators for each of these criteria and apply them to peace
operations that were led by the UN, regional actors or single countries in 13 postconflict countries plus Haiti. By giving a plus or minus score for the number of
criteria that are met, they find that less than half of the 13 achieved some degree
of this criterion for sustainable peace. Namibia and El Salvador rank at the top,
for example, while Sri Lanka and Somalia have the lowest scores. Among the
effective transitions, moreover, there is a considerable difference between topranking Namibia and the minimally effective Eastern Slavonia. The political
criterion in the definition of peace that Sambanis and Doyle add to the absence
of major violence in order to apply a “strict” test involves a minimum standard of
political openness. Applying this expectation to their universe of cases, they find
81 failures and 43 successes, a success rate of only 35%.
To gain further insight into whether successful peacebuilding in terms of violence
avoidance also achieves steps toward greater democratization, one could cull the
existing case studies for generalizations to be tested. Several cases in
Stedman’s volume and other cases suggest that it does not always follow that
successes on the one score such as Guatemala and Lebanon lead to successes
on the second score (Stanley and Holiday, Zahar, in Stedman, 2002; see also
Makdisi and Sadaka, draft, 2002). Charles Call in Stedman (2002) sees El
Salvador, for example, achieving only mixed progress toward democratization.
In short, while the cessation of major violence may be a necessary condition for a
political dimension of peace involving legitimate government, it is not sufficient for
reaching such ends.

31

Economic growth prospects and reduction of poverty. Going further to see what
evidence there is of other criteria being met by post-conflict peacebuilding, we
would have to do comparisons of individual case-studies. This secondary
analysis requires as many cases as possible, but it needs to be methodical if it is
to be reliable in answering our question of concern: has post-conflict
peacebuilding led to economic development? Here, we can only record some
impressions.
Looking at several cases in Stedman, et. al it appears that both strong and weak
performers in terms of avoiding relapse of violence nevertheless have failed to
make much headway so far in reducing poverty and achieving economic growth.
A quick look at non-comparable data from available case-studies of individual
countries such as Mozambique (success on the other criteria), El Salvador
(success on the other criteria) and Lebanon (failure on the other criteria) reveals
that while the first case has fared quite well economically so far, at least at the
aggregate level, the other two are doing poorly at that level (See Weinsten and
Francisco, draft 2002; Cruz and McElhinny, draft 2002; Makdisi and Sadaka,
draft, 2002; Boyce, 1999).
But a more thorough basis is needed for coming to an overall judgment about
whether there are consistent patterns in the paths taken by countries
experiencing post-conflict peacebuilding in terms of economic growth and
poverty concerns. One possible approach could entail looking systematically at
several cases (i.e., through structured, focused comparison) grouped by success
and failure on the other measures. It could be especially revealing to use a “best
case” approach, for example, by looking at how well successes from the point of
view of “mere” peace, such as Namibia, have fared in terms of the deeper criteria
of sustainable peace such as economic structural and social justice criteria. If
most of the best cases have done just as poorly as the failures, then a serious
gap may exist between short-term security results and longer-term economic and
social welfare. On the other hand, if there is a considerable difference in
economic performances, then achieving short-term post-conflict security may
have some influence on improving economic performance and various factors
could be examined to see what made the difference.
Functioning governments. Few studies have looked specifically or systematically
at whether effective post-conflict governments have been established for serving
the public welfare, such as indicated by bureaucracies whose decision-making
functions on relatively non-corrupt, non-political bases. So far, whether strong
states in this sense are created does not seem to be of interest to many
researchers, at least as a dependent variable (but see the next section). The
prima facie evidence from a few case studies suggests, again, rather varied
outcomes. Makdisi and Sadaka (2002) for example, suggest Lebanon has not
progressed very far in this direction.

32

Societal integration Some of the case studies show some interest in the criteria
of increased social equality and societal reconciliation and cohesion. The first
criterion is among the structural factors that generally are believed to produce
violent conflict in the first place. Although most of the empirical literature on the
causes of relapsed conflict does not tackle the problem of gross social
inequalities, several sources such as Paris (2002) and Call (2002) note the
increased social inequality in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mozambique.
Even though we have argued that the latter criterion of increased inter-group
reconciliation may not strictly be a peacebuilding requirement in a strict sense, it
may reflect social inequalities and other criteria that are. One study that looks at
the status of inter-group relations following a war (Zahar, 2002, cf. Paris, 2002),
argues that in Bosnia, Serb-Muslim tensions have not significantly improved
since the Dayton accords in 1995. Zahar is currently comparing that case with
post-conflict Lebanon, another highly divided post-conflict society.
Some cases also refer to another social good that may not be essential for
peacebuilding (unless found of course in a gross form), the level of post-war
crime. The jump in criminal violence in El Salvador and other post-conflict
countries has been widely noted and sometimes examined in detail (e.g., Cruz
and McIlhenny, 2002). Stedman, et. al. has evidence that suggests without
detailed analysis that both strong and weak performers like Mozambique, El
Salvador, and Cambodia still all fail to make much headway in the crime area, as
does Paris (2002) regarding El Salvador. But several authors suggest that the
high incidence of this should not necessarily be read as a portent of wider
political violence.
Conclusion: “What Kind of Peace is Being Built?”
Most of the rigorous research that has been done on the impacts of
peacebuilding has focused almost solely on whether the first criterion for peace
has been achieved – i.e. whether violence and the threat of its recurrence has
been accomplished. This research has not rigorously and comparatively
evaluated peacebuilding terms of several other criteria for sustainable peace
such as economic expansion, gross poverty reduction, adequate government,
and social relations. Single case studies sometimes include data about such
results, but this data is country-specific and tends not to be comparative, or even
to compare the country’s post-conflict conditions to its pre-conflict conditions.
Thus there is no consistent basis for judging their progress or lack of it on these
measures relative to other post-conflict country cases, to other types of conflict
situations, or to non-conflict situations. But unsettling evidence arises from
several case studies, suggesting that some post-conflict countries may have
achieved the end of violence but they have not achieved more legitimate
governance, economic growth, or social reconciliation.

33

Question #2: What works best in peacebuilding?
Given the variation in outcomes across the cases when looking at the same
measures of peace, the issue of what explains success or failure becomes
important. Where the most peacebuilding is being accomplished by various
evaluative measures, what ingredients make that possible?
Broadly speaking, the results may have to do with what kinds of post-conflict
peacebuilding strategies are carried out and how they are applied, or they may
not have to do with peacebuilding activity itself at all but instead, when and where
these activities are applied, such as the nature of the conflict and other
contextual factors.43 Obviously, any policy intervention may be carried out quite
differently than other cases of the same type and reach differing results if they
are introduced into varying contexts. It is crucial to identify what those variations
are, so as to be able to apply the conclusions of any studies to prospective
situations. One can think of the problem as filling in the unknowns in the
following verbal equation: “Intervention type X tends to lead to impacts P and Q,
under conditions A, B, and C.” Although practitioners may get impatient with the
addition of qualifiers, it is only such contingent generalizations that will provide
the most reliable policy advice.
The sources cited above on the outcome of peace processes all yield findings
about the features of the way peacebuilding interventions are carried out, and
aspects of the conflict and the national and regional context that may be
associated with success or failure. Although there is not complete consensus
about the factors that are most crucial, partly this is because of differing
terminology rather than essentially differing conclusions. Some suggestive
patterns emerge.
Nature of the Intervention The first set of factors that determines effectiveness
has to do with the nature and degree of third party intervention. Especially
important are the incentives provided by the content of agreements and the ways
that third parties or others negotiate and implement them. Thus, Durch, et. al.,
point to whether the parties come to the negotiating table under duress from third
parties or simply to gain political points or other advantage. Hampson points to
whether third parties demonstrate an interest in getting deeply engaged in the
implementation of the specifics of the agreement, that is provide continuing
“nurturance,” and the importance of whether the agreement itself provides for
power-sharing. Similarly, Stedman and Rothchild (1998) considered that the
extent the peace agreement is vague and limited, or instead, is precise and
43

Some tend to approach the issue of effectiveness in peacebuilding by assuming that out there
somewhere there are general approaches that simply work, or not, no matter the situation. If
conclusions cannot be reached in the simple form “What works?,” they may conclude that
everything is idiosyncratic and no generic policy knowledge is possible. But this all-or-nothing
assumption can be corrected by recognizing the need to look at not only the results of given kinds
of interventions, but the particular conditions in which they are applied.

34

comprehensive, is crucial. That determines the extent they burden the
implementation process to achieve goals of peace.44
Several authors stress the importance of addressing the respective security fears
and capacities of the parties if lasting peace is to be achieved. Stedman et. al.
(2002) see the principal differences as turning on how difficult the warring parties’
conflict behavior is to influence and in particular, whether their behavior is
motivated by the desire to continue to exploit material gains from war or from fear
of being annihilated by the other side. Walters (1999) draws on the idea of the
“security dilemma” created in post-conflict environments, whereby defensive
steps taken by one party may be interpreted as offensive steps by the other, thus
triggering countermeasures that in turn trigger counter-countermeasures.
Looking at a number of cases, she finds that violence was ended to the extent
that strong security guarantees were provided to the former warring parties by
the peace enforcers, and power sharing was included in the peace agreement.
Although not couched in terms of military security guarantees but other kinds of
payoffs, a similar argument is made by Hartzell (1997). She shows that
successful peace outcomes were arrived at more often when the peace
agreement provide the parties with “institutional guarantees,” by which she
means specific assurances to the parties that they would receive concrete
political, economic or other benefits from signing. Such guarantees might include
power sharing in the central executive offices, territorial autonomy, and
guaranteed proportions of their ethnic group in the new national army.
Several other studies also call attention to the role that such positive incentives
can play, which third parties can provide or influence. Thus, Peceny and Stanley
(1999) question the “realist” assumptions behind the emphasis strictly on security
guarantees. They point out that strong security guarantees were not always
present in relatively successful peace settlements such as Guatemala and El
Salvador, but arguably, such incentives were present in failed agreements such
as Angola, Somalia, and Liberia. Thus, they consider instead that the set of
programs of aid and reform in the successful cases provided sufficiently
attractive “transformational” incentives that a new liberal political culture was
created that actually changed the perspectives of parties of what was in their
interests.
Similarly, Doyle (1997) suggests that the international actors can improve the
chances of consent by the parties through “enhancing consent.” This involves
offering positive incentives in the form of various diplomatic and economic
measures, such as economic assistance, good offices, and friends of the
44

This view that detailed and comprehensive peace agreements are the most likely to achieve
sustainable peace was an underlying premise that inspired the volume by IDEA entitled
Democracy and Deep-Rooted Conflict (1998). It goes into considerable detail on a wide range of
policy instruments from which the parties could choose during their negotiations, in order to
increase the chances that their agreement would last.

35

agreement. They might include support for a civil society that could put pressure
on the parties to abide by what they had agreed to on paper. In Sambanis and
Doyle (2000), the most effective interventions were those where the third party
could apply a range of supports for peacebuilding. Muscular diplomacy and
peace enforcement alone could not consolidate peace.
A corollary arising from all these findings regarding the potency of various
incentives is the finding that it is crucial whether regional powers or global
powers see it in their security interest to intervene, for they are needed to support
with significant resources the incentives that the peace process offers. Hampson
finds that the more successful implementation stories are explained in part by the
extent to which regional and outside powers were not only supportive of the
peace agreement but also helped to nurture it along.
Few of these studies look for unintended negative outcomes of international
policies (i.e., other than failing to achieve their intended goals). But this
possibility is raised by Paris (2002). In comparing a few of the same successful
and unsuccessful cases reviewed above with regard to the reduction of violence
as well as social inequalities and other peace measures, he argues that several
elements of the liberal internationalist doctrine alluded to earlier, such as
structural adjustment and majoritarian elections, can invite unwanted instability
and even violent conflicts if they are applied too quickly and with insufficient
attention to the existing local balance of power, the degree of polarization, and
other contextual factors.45 Consequently, Paris advises peacebuilders as they
apply peacebuilding strategies to look for appropriate balances in each situation
between liberalizing efforts that fragment power and stabilizing emphases that
consolidate power.46 He also recommends putting resources into the creation of
45

Earlier, Lund suggested a similar hypothesis with regard to the possible role in fostering the
onset of some recent conflicts of well-intentioned international policies: “One might hypothesize
that a certain pattern has characterized the international responses to pre-genocide Rwanda,
1993-94; Burundi, 1993; Kosovo, 1992-98; and East Timor, 1999, and possibly other cases. The
international community’s sympathetic political championing of an ethnic minority’s rights, such as
through honoring unofficial referendums and denouncing the human rights violations of their
oppressors, may tend to polarize the local political relations further by demonizing the
perpetrators, and thus help to catalyze violence. The forces of violent backlash in those settings
may be encouraged to pre-empt militarily the impending threat of political change, but the
international community is not prepared to deter that reaction. Ostensible violence prevention
can become violence precipitation, if well-intentioned advocacy of human rights promotion,
provision of humanitarian aid, or other international measures are advanced on behalf of a
vulnerable group, but actually puts them at greater risk by tempting the more powerful and betterarmed forces of reaction to strike while they can pre-empt the forces of change, because
adequate international provision is not made to protect their victims. ”
46
Lund concluded similarly with regard to potential conflict situations: “The policy implication is
that, rather than a “one-size fits all” approach in foreign policies and aid strategies that presses
for the same liberalizing reforms everywhere, individual countries need to be differentiated
according to their capacity to absorb disruptive shifts in unregulated power and consequent
instability without violent conflict. A more balanced, holistic, contextualized approach to fostering
desireable change needs to be applied. Clearly, moves toward democratization and other
reforms can themselves often be among the adaptive mechanisms that help ensure a peaceful

36

strong state institutions that have enough influence on the contending parties that
they can encompass competing political interests so as to force compromises.
Settings As mentioned previously, another set of factors that are crucial in
determining post-conflict peacebuilding outcomes are the various characteristics
of the conflict that is being addressed and other aspects of the political, economic
or other contexts into which peacebuilding is introduced. As Stedman puts it,
Guatemala and Namibia may have more going for them than Sierra Leone and
Bosnia.47 Here, there is considerable consensus that the severity and level of
the conflict itself is essential. Hampson finds that the more successful
implementation stories are explained by the ripeness of the conflict, which
shapes whether the parties were motivated to make peace. Durch, et. al., also
concludes that the effectiveness of transitions to peace depended in part on the
nature and relative severity of the conflict.
In particular, the easier contexts involved wars over control of the central
government rather than an attempt to break away; differences between the
parties that were political or ideological rather than religious, ethnic or tribal; and
finally, situations where there was less destruction of the society and
government. In the more effective transitions, the intervening armed forces did
not have to actually enforce peace by first reducing the level of conflict. Similarly,
Sambanis and Doyle identify the most amenable contexts as those with relatively
high levels of development, non-identity conflicts, and low levels of hostility.
Dubey (2002) finds that the longer the conflict and the higher level of its
hostilities, the less likely peace can be restored.48 The activities of war
themselves have a crucial impact on political negotiations and almost everything
else. In short, post-conflict peacebuilding works best where the past violent
conflict has been less.
Stedman’s latest work focuses on spoils and spoilers more than agreements. He
argues that the outcome is determined not so much by the quality of the peace
agreement as by whether various kinds of military or political “spoilers” are
operating inside or outside the peace negotiations. He argues that whether
spoilers have different behaviors in their histories or they have current access to
natural resources as the spoils they can use to support their armies, and thus
perpetuate the conflict, will determine whether they enter peace agreements on
the one hand, simply to gain advantages but ultimately to scuttle them (such as
by deceptively conveying insecurities they do not actually feel), or on the other,
they can be enticed to make and keep real concessions. Spoilers can subvert
transition in particular settings. But the overarching and overriding policy goal perhaps should not
be simply democracy or human rights or markets, etc., at any cost. It should rather be peaceful
transition toward, ultimately, more democratic, or at least legitimate and effective governments,
increasingly more productive economies, and more humane societies. ” Lund in Hampson and
Malone (2001).
47
Stedman, 2002, p. 665.
48
Dubey (2002) adds that conflicts were more easily ended where chief executives had some
constraints on their power.

37

the purposes of a peace agreement unless its third party implementers craft
specific strategies that either positively induce the spoilers to follow along or
coerce them to comply. For Stedman et. al. (2002), the difference turns mainly
on how difficult the conflict behavior of the parties is to influence and in particular,
whether the warring parties are strongly motivated to continue to exploit material
gains from war or from fear of being annihilated by the other side.
Reinforcing the importance of the economic context, Wood points out how the
parties in the successful Namibia accord were more economically mutually
dependent on each other because it was clear that its already somewhat
developed economy would grow further only if they cooperated in adopting
effective policies. But whereas those parties had incentives to cooperate to
achieve an indivisible public good, in Angola the parties fought over the divisible
resources of oil and diamonds, so their contest proceeded as a zero-sum game.
Also regarding context, several sources also stress the essential need to identify
how pressures from neighboring states in the conflicted country’s region will
influence the direction of its conflict and any subsequent peace process.
Policy Recommendations Various prescriptions to third party policymakers follow
from these analyses of the ingredients in post-conflict settlements that have
achieved various degrees of sustainable peace. While no simple, single
blueprint can be sketched for all post-conflict situations, the comparative
research does yield some policy-relevant guidelines as to what to do when and
how for maximizing the changes of effectiveness. We include here those
recommendations as well some taken from less formal studies done on one or
more cases by other specialists (e.g., Woodward, Christian Michelson, Chopra),
wherever they suggest similar lessons.
Some of these lessons concern processes of planning and decisionmaking -how things are done as against what specifically is done in what circumstances.
A lot of agreement from these several studies arises from their criticisms of the
ad hoc and ill-prepared way the UN’s and others’ decisionmaking habits, and the
perennial lack of adequate resources and delays in fudning, affect what is done
or not done in the field. The advice thus centers around the importance of prior
planning and developing a clear and coherent strategy. Although these generic
conclusions often sound little more specific than the truisms that were criticized
earlier, the consistency with which they appear is striking. This advice includes:
•
•
•

Assess the degree of difficulty of the situations on the ground before
deciding whether to commit to it, thus setting realistic situation-specific
goals.49
Establish early on a plan or strategy with clear, explicit goals.
Define and get agreement on end goals before initiating operations.

49

Stedman, et. al. advocate that more resources be put into prior assessment of the degree of
difficulty of the situation on the ground and its changing nature, and they go so far as to
recommend against even trying to tackle the hard cases.

38

•
•
•
•
•
•

At the same time, maintain flexibility, do contingency planning that looks to
revising the strategy, and stay open to innovative risk-taking.
Match what can be accomplished to the resources available. For
example, be clear to the Security Council if their marching orders
realistically cannot be implemented.
Use policy mechanisms or procedures that ensure this planning and
coordination among the several essential parties, as well as optimal unity
of command on the ground.50
Maintain political support from major powers and international coalitions.
Avoid donor competition by setting up coordination conferences.
Establish appropriate but finite periods as the time limits for missions.

Several of these sources also give more substantive, as against process,
guidance about what should be done and when. Most interesting here are the
conclusions about what types of certain actions should get priority over others
and the specific limits of various actions and actors. Such prioritizing advice
begins to look like a strategy.51 In any case, it is crucial if peacebuilding is going
to realistically get beyond the vain expectation that every mission will
approximate the multi-dimensional ideal composite model that was sketched
earlier. It is one thing to advocate that such an approach be aspired, it is quite
another to actually realize it on the ground.52 Such points include:
• Get a ceasefire before tackling other tasks.
• Strengthen national institutions through budget support and employment
generation, so that a functioning sovereign government exists that has
financial and legal institutions to deploy resources and act as a
counterpart to the international community.
• Avoid relying solely on negotiating political power sharing and elite
compacts as the sole means for creating a functioning government and
sustaining peace; their tendency is simply to divide up a country’s spoils.
• Consider using police instead of armies for maintaining public security.
• Peacekeepers can use confidence building measures where the parties
are already motivated to find peace.
• If the parties are not thus motivated, peacekeepers must employ more
forceful measures to deter conflict and compel the parties to restrain the
use of force.
• Concentrate more resources into inducing armies to transform themselves
into political parties and into security sector reform.
50

But coherence need not mean an integrated structure. Based on looking at East Timor, Astri
Suhrke (2002, p. 18) advises against the Brahimi Report’s recommendation to link civilian and
peacekeeping functions.
51
To be clear, the point of gathering such findings is not to insist that each should always be
followed rigidly in every specific case, as if they are laws. It is rather that many cases suggest
that these courses of action be presumed to offer better advice than any competing general
suggestions that can offer much less supporting evidence.
52
See the doubts raised in Chester Crocker’s Foreword and Duane Bratt’s concluding chapter in
Chopra.

39

•
•
•
•
•
•

More resources are needed to ensuring civil security by strengthening the
police and judicial system.
Look beyond military operations to facilitate the broader goals such as
building institutions and human capital.
Adjust the pace of implementing activities to the capacity of domestic
institutions to absorb the resources and handle the tasks. For example,
introduce reconstruction funds gradually if warlords would otherwise
capture them.
A particularly cost-effective measure is to build up local capacity to
monitor gross human rights violations.
Focus resources on changing unreconciled contending political interests.
Powerful positive incentives such as various forms of targeted
development aid and other inducements should be focused directly on the
parties or at least directly affect them, to forge buy-in by conflicting parties
to comply with peace agreements.

Conclusion
Some of the findings that have been uncovered seem to run contrary to
conventional wisdoms in peacebuilding circles. For example, it has sometimes
been heard lately that the stages of conflicts are an obsolete criterion and cannot
inform what kinds of interventions to deploy when. But to the extent that the level
of violent conflict is high and the capacity of the society to handle it is low, more
coercive measures apparently are essential to establishing some minimum
physical order before other measures can make much of a difference. It is also
interesting from the point of view of common assumptions that several of these
studies resurrect the value of “top-down” military security and political power
incentives such as power-sharing, and also that state-supporting measures are
needed, rather than only “bottom-up” civil-society-supporting actions. Whereas
peacebuilders may have seen themselves in “counter-culture” roles against the
conventional wisdoms of the security specialists, these studies of several cases
suggests that a more sophisticated balancing and blending of “hard” and “soft”
approaches is called for.
At the same time, however, although an end to violence seems the most
important goal before others can be accomplished, and major powers providing
security guarantees may be necessary to achieve that, neither of these elements
alone or the other ingredients have been sufficient to move a post-conflict society
to tackle effectively political and social problems such as establishing an effective
government and reducing poverty. For this, a variety of positive and concrete
incentives seems to be needed to more toward a fuller notion of sustainable
peace, as long as they can operate in an environment that is basically stable and
not immediately threatened by violence. We found practically no research of a
methodical, comparative nature that pursued the crucial question of what
ingredients are needed to move a poor but at least non-violent situation post-

40

conflict environment toward effective government, economic development, and
social progress.
All in all, the cross-sectional and case study research briefly reviewed above
hardly provides a ringing endorsement of the peacebuilding done so far, but it
does indicate that relatively effective peacebuilding has been implemented and
can have positive results, at least in terms of certain limited effectiveness criteria.
Under certain conditions and through applying various powerful means of
influence, peacebuilding can achieve the beginnings at least of sustainable
peace. While the research does not give peacebuilding a high rating, it also
shows the ways and contexts in which peacebuilding can have definite value
when done in a strategic way and by consulting guidelines that policy research
on similar cases provides.
It is crucial that policymakers and practitioners take findings of this kind seriously
because they suggest which actions are likely to be most effective in given
situations and the sequence in which different efforts are applied. We found that
the empirical research yields a fairly specific and economic list of guidelines
regarding what is most important to do in addressing post-conflict situations. No
one technique or answer stands out about what is best to do, but certain patterns
emerge about the relationships of various kinds of peacebuilding efforts and the
settings in which they are introduced. Although mistakes are still going to be
repeated that might have been avoided by a more serious look at this past
experience, according to Woodward, there is in fact also a lot of learning going
on from one instance of peacekeeping and peacebuilding to another. But more
transfer of this kind of knowledge from one situation to the next is needed, taking
into account of course that one is cannot step into exactly the same river.
IV. ALTERNATIVES TO POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING
Looking at past performances, we have found some justification for deciding
whether to continue to promote post-conflict peacebuilding as an option for
international actors. A respectable case can be made. While no clear grounds
arose for flatly rejecting peacebuilding, however, this choice still depends on
one’s standards. Someone could conclude from the same evidence we have
presented that the glass is half empty (or even two-thirds empty), instead of half
full. For many people, that post-conflict peacebuilding works only here and there
and only under certain fairly demanding conditions, and fails in many respects
more than half of the time, may not add up to a sufficiently impressive record to
justify any investment at all. Is the game worth the candle?
Compared to what? To come up with meaningful answers to the basic concerns
stated at the outset of this paper about the overall upshot of post-conflict
peacebuilding, we cannot answer the question in isolation. We also need to
consider whether peacebuilding is better or worse than other fundamentally
different ways for dealing with conflicts in developing societies. How does
peacebuilding compare to the main alternatives? Perhaps there are superior
41

approaches of vastly different natures. On the other hand, even though
peacebuilding does not work well, like Churchill’s remark about the minimal
virtues of democracy, peacebuilding may be the best choice that we’ve got
among even worse alternatives.
To answer this meta-peacebuilding question would require a systematic
comparison of several entirely different options for approaching intra-state
conflicts – that is, instead of only the option of doing the best possible job of
peacebuilding itself. The main logical alternatives to post-conflict peacebuilding
that could be pitted against one another for such a full comparison would appear
to be: doing nothing and leaving intra-state wars to the actors themselves to work
out if they want; intervening militarily to stop such wars; avoiding getting into
post-conflict challenges unless absolutely necessary by preventing them from
breaking out; or addressing the fundamental causes of conflicts in a significantly
more “aggressive” way.53
At the obvious risk of being accused of trying to play God by posing these basic
alternatives, discussion of the pros and cons of these alternatives would be
fruitful. After all, a major debate has been raging for years about whether to
intervene or not, even though that covers only one of the five possible options: C.
The aim below is merely to put all five options on the table so that a logical way
to proceed is laid out for settling the fundamental question raised earlier about
the ultimate worth of peacebuilding. A few words follow on Alternatives B and C.
We subsequently treat Alternatives D and E at somewhat greater length.
Alternative B: Benign Neglect One option would be to allow intra-state wars to
continue by making no effort to mediate a settlement or to follow-up peace
agreements with international peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
Heartless though it seems, allowing intra-state wars to go on and perhaps burn
themselves out, has been followed in practice by the international community and
states. This is essentially how the southern area of Somalia has been treated
since the US and the UN pulled out in the early 1990s and left it to the warlords,
some humanitarian agencies and NGOs. The war between the Taliban and the
northern alliance in Afghanistan before October 6, 2001 is a more obvious
example.
A policy argument for benign neglect is seriously proposed by Edward Luttwak.
The argument is that the intractable conflicts arising in some developing
countries should be cordoned off and allowed to play out, rather than making
fruitless international efforts to terminate or manage them. There is some
evidence that the peace that follows a definitive defeat of one party by another
may be more durable than one stopped before this occurs through third party
mediations. However, other studies have examined the devastating human and
53

Another possible category would be for the international commuity to occupy “failed states”and
assume more protectorates. But in the short term, this could be considered a strong variant of
peacebuilding.

42

economic impacts of wars on national economies (Paul Collier). To weigh this
option would require a much fuller analysis of cost and benefits and to whom.
Alternative C: Mid-conflict Intervention Intervening militarily into the midst of
wars, even when hostilities are in full swing, and thus through military or other
powerful means, is another possibility. This approach has also been utilized in
the 1990s as well as earlier, such as in the form of humanitarian intervention and
indirect military support of one side or another (Croatia and Kosovo). The
outcomes of this approach have been studied by researchers as well (e.g.
Regan, 2002; Betts, 2000). Generally, this option faces immense difficulties both
on the ground and politically.
Although there do not seem to be strong grounds for advising either of these
options, they are not pursued any further here, but not because they are rejected
out of hand. They should be looked at further so as to have a balanced
comparison of the effects of all the main international options.
Alternative D: Prevention of Violent Conflict As we saw earlier, the prevention of
future conflicts from erupting in the first place is being looked at very seriously by
many actors in various forms such as through early warning efforts to anticipate
the outbreak of wars and efforts to prevent them. It clearly is regarded as more
attractive in almost every respect than the previous two. This view is that rather
than seeing the principal international role as mainly that of waiting until conflicts
have wound down and then preparing to help restore societies in their aftermath,
or trying to arrest them in mid-course and then doing the rest, or neglecting to do
either, international actors should prepare to avoid the next possible wars from
breaking out at all.
Virtually every organization and even analysts that take up conflict prevention
have concluded that it is more cost-effective than mid- or post-conflict
interventions. A more authoritative and compelling basis for such beliefs has
been done by a methodical comparison of the costs of actual cases of prevention
such as Slovakia versus the costs from humanitarian and peacekeeping
interventions of actual like conflicts. Although more rigorous comparison perhaps
could be done, the prima facie evidence is strong. In response to the recent
increase in explicit prevention activity, a number of researchers have looked at
cases of intra-state potential or actual violent conflicts in order to identify some of
the elements that appear to be associated with the (unheralded) “successes” and
the (more publicized ) “failures” (although most outcomes are not simply one or
the other). Like the post-conflict research above, these studies have focussed on
multi-actor, multi-instrument preventive engagements but in situations of
potentially violent conflict where it has not occurred before. Appendix A
presents some of the findings from this research.
Alternative E: Fundamental Reordering of Global Priorities. This option is based
on the view that conflicts and their underlying sources are brought about primarily

43

by various global trends and therefore changes in current global priorities and
institutions of global governance would make peacebuilding -- as well as conflict
prevention -- both easier to do and less necessary altogether. This perspective
is often supported by those who make the argument discussed previously that
current international approaches to peacebuilding are illegitimate. Many seem to
attribute the kinds of failures of peacebuilding to achieve greater economic
growth and social justice to the policies of the international organizations that
decide on and carry out these missions and to the dominant world actors who are
believed to manipulate them almost as if they are marionnettes. From this is
inferred the idea that if altogether different actors were involved and different
theories were applied, most conflict situations would be significantly if not totally
alleviated.
The neo-orthodox economic ideology that has sometimes been applied too
hastily and harshly in post-conflict societies has increased not only social
suffering but also possibly the degree of political stability in the short run.
Studies by Boyce and others suggest that applying neo-orthodox economic
policies to post-conflict economies is seriously misguided.54 Charbonnier
suggests that economic policies toward such societies have to explicitly factor in
the effect that they have on political stability so as not to impose severe strains
and also to promote peace processes.
But this does not mean those policies are the source of the whole problem. We
need to be careful we do not misdiagnose the source of conflicts and of the
problems in dealing with them, by confusing a part for the whole. It is not clear
from research on structural adjustment policies, for example, that these lead to
major political turmoil and wider violent conflict results (e.g. Bienen). And on the
other hand, there is a great deal of large “n” research that shows that the policies
of liberalization such as free trade, foreign direct investment of certain kinds, and
other programs of economic reform – all sometimes lumped under the notion of
“globalization” – are correlated quite impressively, not with the increase in violent
conflict, but with its decrease (Gurr. et. al., 1999; Hegre and Gledditsch, 2001;
Blanton, 2002). The same can be said about poverty. Where there is less
liberalization, there tends to be more conflict and poverty. On the more political
side of liberalism, there is of course the whole corpus of empirical research that
shows that democracy is also strongly correlated with peace, although the
transition from authoritarian systems toward more democratic systems is fraught
with peril (Mansfield and Snyder).
There are a number of reasons why caution in evaluating the criticism of neoliberal economics and politics is called for and careful research needs to be
done. First, selective evidence of the immediate social consequences of
structural adjustment policies, as harmful as the latter may be, may be
erroneously used to paint a picture that is too sweeping in its indictment
regarding the basic sources of the post-conflict societies’ lack of the achievement
54

James K. Boyce, Investing in Peace (IISS, 2002).

44

of the deeper conditions needed for sustainable peace. What may be
fundamentally the problem is not the World Bank, the IMF, the UN, the US and
the liberal ideology they all promulgate. It may be instead a lack of sufficient
sensitivity in how and when those policies are implemented. Perhaps the baby
needs to be thrown out but not the bath water. Second, to properly weigh these
findings, Paris (2001) cautions rightly that the process of developing a functioning
market economy is inherently difficult to achieve in the short term. Finally,
domestic factors may be crucial such as the kinds of elite compacts that have
formed in post-conflict societies between major parties that represent different
elements in society, and the alliances set up between elected leaders and
powerful economic interests.55
Interestingly, this focus on righting the balance between social and economic
policies is actually the same direction that much thinking is going in that is now
found within the policy debates and discourse of these global institutions
themselves. It is reflected in the promotion of a social agenda (e.g., social safety
nets) by no less than the World Bank president himself. This is not an argument
for the protesters against these organizations to go home and leave things to the
technocrats. To the contrary, it is an argument for continuing to raise the
temperature. But the most effective approach may be to add more light as well
as more heat, by focusing the critique in more targetted ways, both at the generic
level and especially in particular countries, through thorough methodical analysis
of as many cases as possible.
III.
NEXT STEPS:
WHAT FURTHER RESEARCH WOULD BE USEFUL?
We conclude with ideas on what this review of existing research on key
questions in peacebuilding might suggest as to fruitful further research efforts on
peacebuilding.
The preparation of this paper could not search all the case-studies or data bases
that may be available that would reveal how well individual post-conflict countries
have done in terms of criteria such as the above like more respect for human
rights, and so on. But more such comparative studies would fill an important
gap. To produce meaningful results that can generate policy-relevant
conclusion, however, such an investigation needs to make conceptual and
practical choices as to which and how many criteria for sustainable peace to
examine and whether to define them as indicators of peace or indicators of postconflict development and nation-building. As we have argued, at some point, the
results criteria shade into factors whose reduction or improvement are simply

55

Although not examining post-conflict cases, Teichman (2002), for example, see significant
differences in the extent of social sensitivity of national policies between Chile, Argentina and
Mexico based on the greater social emphasis and less capture of the state by narrow interests
that she observes in the first country, but not the other two.

45

desireable as ends in themselves, not because they are necessarily known to be
causes of conflict and necessary ingredients for sustainable peace.
A value-added project that would help to close the obvious gaps in the existing
post-conflict peacebuilding empirical research would look at some of the same
cases and other cases but with an eye to a wider range of criteria for sustainable
peace than has been examined so far. What kind of peace is being built in terms
of building states and societies and improving societal conditions and policies
that can effectively address the more chronic and fundamental dynamics in postconflict societies that may threaten in the medium if not short term to pull postconflict societies down once again into conflict? Where the most progress on
desired goals is being made, what domestic and external factors are associated
with these results?
A focused comparative research project on a set of key “best” and “worst” cases
could produce very solid and yet policy-relevant propositions about what further
elements of sustainable peace are obtained under what contextual conditions,
and when differing military, diplomatic, and development intervention “packages”
are applied and in what sequences. Such a project could start by doing
secondary analysis that applies a standardized comparative framework of
research questions and peace criteria in order to cull the available case-studies
on several post-conflict countries (and other available documentation on for
example, social, economic and political indicators) and then codes the results.
Initial commissioned papers might be a first step in delving further into what is
being found in existing research, what is known or not known about the issues,
and where gaps may exist that might be pursued through solid analysis.
In any case, future research collaboration needs to focus on generic subjects
such as these that have wide cross-regional significance and thus applicability to
several particular contexts but also national resonance among the interested
partners of IDRC. Such research also needs to be responsive to the needs of
actual practitioners but at the same time, somewhat removed from the immediate
constraints of political and bureaucratic pressures as well as those of advocacy
politics. The boundaries between analysis and advocacy need to be kept clear.
But there is no inherent reason why disciplined discourse and rigorous methods
of quantitative and comparative research cannot be linked with the moral
energies of practitioners who seek a better world -- through a process of focused
analysis that leads to intelligent action. Clarity can be joined with conviction;
evaluation can be linked to action.

46

Appendix A
Key Ingredients in Effective Macro-level Conflict Prevention
The following discussion pulls together some of the preliminary generalizations
that are suggested by existing conflict prevention research. Though based on
existing systematic research, the generalizations are preliminary hypotheses that
additional research needs to test further.56 Recent case-study findings suggest
that serious intra-state political tensions and issues will tend to be addressed
peacefully, rather than escalate into violence, to the extent that the following
ingredients are present:57
Features of the Preventive Engagement Itself
When is action taken?
1. Timely, early action is taken as tensions are emerging, but before, rather than
following, significant use of violence, or immediately after initial outbreaks.
2. Engagement prioritizes the various goals of preventing violence (security,
“peace”), managing issue disputes, and transforming overall institutions and
societies, e.g. political and social justice) – i.e., “direct” and “structural”
prevention -- in contextually-appropriate mixes and sequences. Such
prioritization generally recognizes that when behaviors and actions
56

These findings are presented in a structured outline in which lessons can be cumulated in an
ongoing data-base, which is currently under development. This data-base is being developed
further so it can be continuously refined, and its findings continuously disseminated to those
decisionmakers who can make best use of these lessons. Presented in this way, case studies
can provide the basis for policy guidelines to effective conflict prevention practice for would-be
conflict preventors.
57
This synthesis draws from, among others, Hugh Miall, The Peacemakers: Peaceful Settlement
of Disputes since 1945 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992); Gabriel Munuera, Preventing
Armed Conflict in Europe: Lesson from Recent Experience (Paris: Institute for Security Studies,
June, 1994); SusanWoodward, Balkan Tragedy: Chaos and Dissolution after the Cold War
(Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1995; Lund, Preventing Violent Conflict (U.S. Institute of
Peace, 1996); Peter Wallensteen, ed. Preventing Violent Conflict: Past Record and Future
Challenges (Uppsala: Uppsala University, Department of Peace and Conflict Research, 1998);
Lund, Rubin and Hara, "Learning from Burundi’s Failed Democratic Transition, 1993-96: Did
International Initiatives Match the Problem?" in Barnett Rubin, ed. Cases and Strategies of
Preventive Action (Century Foundation Press, 1998); Vayrinen, et. al., Inventive and Preventive
Diplomacy, (Notre Dame, Indiana:Joan Kroc Institute, University of Note Dame, 1999); Lund, “
'Preventive Diplomacy' for Macedonia, 1992-1997: Containment becomes Nation-Building,” and
other chapters in Bruce Jentleson, ed. Preventive Diplomacy in the Post Cold War World:
Opportunities Missed, Opportunities Seized and Lessons to Be Learned (Lanham, Maryland:
Rowman and Littlefield, 1999); Lund, “Why Are Some Ethnic Disputes Settled Peacefully, While
Others Become Violent? Comparing Slovakia, Macedonia, and Kosovo,” in Hayward Alker, et. al.
Eds. Journeys through Conflict (Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield, forthcoming in 2001).
Special note should also be made of an outstanding forthcoming book by Barnett Rubin, Blood on
the Doorstep: The Politics of Preventive Action (Brookings Institution Press, 2002), which
includes four case-studies.

47

immediately threaten major loss of life and destruction, they need to be
deterred or stopped before more fundamental structures of power and socioeconomic advantage are addressed. But also that short-term crisis
management needs to be followed by actions that credibly tackle more
fundamental issues.
What action is taken?
3. Early action is robust, rather than half-hearted and equivocal, by exerting
vigorous positive and negative inducements specifically on the major
potentially conflicting parties’ leaders and their mobilized rank and file.58
4. Early action thus brings an appropriate mix of sufficiently vigorous
(conditional) carrots, (unconditioned) support, actual or potential sticks,
negotiating “tables,” and other modes of influence to bear on the several most
important short-term and long term sources of potential conflicts, the key
“fronts” in which conflicts are being played out.
5. Early action does not solely promote the cause of the weaker parties in the
conflict but also addresses the fears and insecurities of dominant parties.
(Hereagain, as in post-conflict peacebuiiling, preventive peacebuilding has to
balance the priorities of maintaining minimum order and security as against
achieving the other desired goals of political and social justice.)59
6. Support and protection is provided to established governing formal institutions
of the state, to the extent that they incorporate the leaders of the main
contending communities in power-sharing in rough proportion to their
distribution in the population, rather than buttressing an exclusionary
governmental structure or alternatively, an anti-state political opposition.
Responsible autonomous organs of the state and within the security forces
are assisted to provide public services professionally. This enables the state
58

For example, empirical studies of the antecedents of “genocides” and “politicides” conflicts by
Barbara Harff suggest that announcements of possible international preventive interventions that
in fact do not happen or are half-hearted and largely symbolic may be interpreted by determined
combatants as a go-ahead signal to pursue the conflict with impunity through further oppression
or aggression.
59
Where needed to avoid backlash from a threatened but powerful ancien regime, such an
approach seeks to keep lines out and open to moderates or other persuadable elites, rather than
prematurely stamping them as pariahs and giving them no recourse for shifting their loyalties to
join the forces of change. It looks for opportunities for quiet “constructive engagement” with
existing regime leaders and their cliques, to point out the “handwriting on the wall” and conjure up
historic roles for them as national invigorators. This avoids a sentimental or expressive moralistic
approach in favor of an instrumental pragmatic approach. It eschews Manichean “good guys”
versus “bad guys” campaigns in favor of tactics that address leaders’ specific political and
economic incentives. If necessary because of the prevailing balance of power, it creates
opportunities for amnesty or “soft landings” to avoid existing leaders from digging in their heels. It
engages and supports existing moderate elements within hegemonic regimes, to exercise
transformation from within.

48

to host a process of give-and-take politicking over public policy and
constitutional issues and to carry out business for the benefit of the general
population.
7. Opportunities for joining regional security alliances and trade cooperation also
create an overall climate of support for building liberal peaceful states.60
8. Outside formal government, a broad-based “constituency for peace” is built
up over time that cuts across the society’s main politicized identity groups,
that is not solely interested in politics, is primarily interested in business and
other peaceful pursuits and can generate wealth, and that thus has a vested
interest in political stability and social prosperity.61
9. A politically active but independent and cross-cutting civil society is
encouraged to unify major identity groups. Peaceful people power campaigns
are supported through training opposition leaders in non-violent tactics and
non-incendiary rhetoric, but that exert significant pressure on incumbent
leaders to take peaceful, responsible actions or retire from office.
Who takes action?
10. Preventive engagements are implemented by a sufficient number and kind of
governmental and non-governmental actors, so as to provide the range of
needed instruments (mediation, deterrence, institution-building, etc.) and
resources to address the leading sources of the conflict. In the process,
these actors form a “critical mass” that visibly symbolizes a significant
international commitment to non-violent change.
Rarely can any single actor or action prevent serious violent intra-state
conflicts.
11. The engagement is supported politically and in other ways, or at least
tolerated and not blocked or undermined by:
• major regional powers
• major world powers.

60

As in Eastern Europe, this may involve offering specific attractive incentives to current or
alternative leaders and elites which promise that, if their national policies achieve economic and
political reforms, respect minorities, etc. they can hold power by gaining the political support of
interest groups and publics who will see benefit from integration.
61
This guideline thus eschews reinforcing or coddling ethnic minority movements that tend to
polarize national politics by boycotting a polity’s elections and declining other opportunities to
participate in and thus leaven mainstream political life. It avoids polarizing the political conflict to
dangerous lengths by siding only with political oppositions in “we versus them” struggles and thus
keeps international support from being a catalyst that provokes violent backlash, unless it is also
prepared to protect the innocent victims of repression.

49

12. The engagement is generally viewed as legitimate by its being carried out
under the aegis of the UN or a regional multilateral organization involving the
states affected.
How is action taken?
13. The early multi-faceted action is concerted and consistent among the major
external actors, rather than scattered or contradictory.
Features of the regional, national, and local context
Where is action most likely to be effective?
14. Past relations between the politically significant groups have been peaceful in
the recent past, rather than violent.
15. Moderate leaders from each of the contending communities are in positions of
authority and in regular contact as they carry out the public’s business, and
they show some progress in carrying out public policies that benefit all
communities, including providing for physical security.
16. The following regional actors adjacent or close to the immediate arena of
conflict are neutral to an emerging conflict or actively promote its peaceful
resolution, rather than supporting one side or another politically or militarily.
• neighboring states,
• refugee communities.
17. The diasporas of the parties to a conflict that reside in major third party
countries also support peaceful means of resolution, or at least are not highly
mobilized behind their respective countrymen’s cause. Thus, they do not aid
and abet coercive or violent ways to pursue the conflict and lobby their host
governments to take a partisan stance toward the conflict.
The reader may have noticed that several of these hypotheses sound similar to
some of the generalizations reviewed earlier about post-conflict peacebuilding.
Similar elements involved are the balance of power, the sequencing of actions,
the differing potential of coercive and non-coercive techniques, power-sharing,
the level and recency of conflict, and the stance taken by regional and global
actors.
Although such findings are accumulating, however, they have yet to be
significantly recognized, boiled down, and utilized to inform decisionmaking and
thus really “learned” by the very organizations to which they pertain. The lessons
gathered from actual experience at the country and other levels of practice need
to be reconnected to the actual routines and established processes of

50

decisionmaking and implementation so they can be incorporated as lessons in
country-level strategies.62
Some of the conclusions uncovered from the systematic empirical literature seem
to run against the grain of conventional wisdoms among peacebuilding
practitioners. There may thus be a serious “macro-micro gap” in the field
between practitioner discourse and interests compared to some of the findings
about overall results that is coming out of the existing research genres. This
does not seem to be a matter of “different perspectives,” which suggests they are
just using different optics to look at the same thing. It seems rather more a
matter of looking at different levels of activity, albeit found within the same
universe.
On the one hand, many practitioners push on doggedly in doing their various
assigned tasks in the field and perhaps define and measure effectiveness in
terms of day-to-day or week-to-week accomplishments. But they are not trained
in macro-political and statistical analysis, and rarely look at the whole question of
whether peacebuilding missions achieve their overall goals or not, and why. On
the other hand, however, the economist and political scientist researchers who
do large “n” or comparative case-study research at the macro level of country
cases do not take an interest in specific operational questions and examine only
a very few bottom-line indicators of overall results from multi-actor peacebuilding
interventions. Differing conclusions emerge from these micro and macro
perspectives, although they may not be ultimately irreconciliable but simply
operating at different levels.

62

Early outlines of the essential steps in tailoring country-specific strategies are found in Michael
S. Lund, “Policymaking and Implementation,“ Chapter 4 in Preventing Violent Conflicts: A
Strategy for Preventive Diplomacy (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Institute of Peace, 1996), and Michael
S. Lund, “Developing Case-Based Conflict Prevention and Peacebuilding Strategies from Recent
Experience in Europe,“ Chapter Two in G. Bonvicini, et. al. eds. Preventing Violent Conflict:
Issues from the Baltics and the Caucasus (Baden-Baden: Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft, 1998).

51

Bibliography
Anderson, Mary, 1999. Do No Harm: How Aid Can Support Peace – Or War. Boulder, CO.: Lynne
Rienner
Bailey, Allison. “United Nations Peacebuilding and Cultural Conflict: Is it Worth the Cost?”
Presented at the International Studies Association conference, New Orleans, La, March 24, 2002.
33 pages.
Betts, Richard K. 2002. Conflict after the Cold War: arguments on causes of war and peace. New
York, NY.: Longman.
Boyce, Carole, Ali A. Mazrui, Isidore Okpewho, eds. 1999. The African diaspora : African origins
and New World identities. Fort Wayne, IN.: Indiana University Press.
Boyce, James K. 2002. Investing in Peace: Aid and Conditionality after Civil Wars, Adelphi
Paper 351. London: IISS.
Carment, David and Patrick James, eds. 1998. Peace in the Midst of Wars: Preventing and
Managing International Ethnic Conflicts. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Charbonnier, Gilles, 1998. „Conflict, Postwar Rebuilding and the Economy: A Critical Review of
the Literature,“ War Torn Societies Paper No. 2, March 1998;
Charbonnier, Gilles, 2002. „The Competing Agendas of Economic Reform and Peace Process: A
Politico-Economic Model Applied to Guatemala,“ World Development August, 2002. Vol. 30,
Issue 8. pp. 1323-1339.
Chopra, Jarat ed., The Politics of Peace-Maintenance (Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1998).
Collier, Paul, and Jan Dehn. 2001. Aid, shocks, and growth. Washington, D.C.: World Bank,
Development Research Group, Office of the Director, 2001.
Cortright, David, ed. 1998. The Price of Peace: The Role of Incentives in International Conflict
Prevention. Lanham, MD, Rowman & Littlefield.
Doyle, Michael W. and Nicholas Sambanis. 2000. “International Peacebuilding: A Theoretical and
Quantitative Analysis.” American Political Science Review. 94:779.
Doyle, Michael W. 1997. Ways of war and peace : realism, liberalism, and socialism. New York,
NY.: Norton.
Dubey, Amitabh. “Domestic Settlements and the Duration of Civil War Settlements” Presented at
the International Studies Association conference New Orleans, La, March 24-27, 2002. 28 pages.
Cited with permission of author.
Esman, Milton J. 1998. “Can Foreign Aid Moderate Ethnic Conflict?” Peaceworks, #13,
Washington, D.C.: US Institute of Peace.
Forman, Shepard, et.al., Recovering from Conflict: Strategy for An International Response (New
York: Center on International Cooperation, n.d.)
Galama, Annek, and Paul van Tongren, eds. 2002. Towards Better Peacebuilding Practice: On
Lessons Learned, Evaluation Practices and Aid and Conflict. Utrecht, Netherlands: European
Centre for Conflict Prevention.

52

Haugerudbraaten, Henning. “Peacebuilding: Six Dimensions and Two Concepts”, African
Security Review. Vol. 7, No. 6, pp 17-26.
Hampson, Fen Osler, David M. Malone. 2002. From reaction to conflict prevention: opportunities
for the UN system. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner Publishers
Hampson, Fen Osler and Judith Reppy, eds. 1996. Earthly goods : environmental change and
social justice. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Hartzel, Caroline A. 1999. “Explaining the Stability of Negotiated Settlements to Intrastate Wars.”
The Journal of Conflict Resolution. 43: 3-22.
Hartzel, Caroline A. 1997?
International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty. 2001. The Responsibility to
Protect. Ottawa: IDRC.
Krain, Matthew. “Responding to Revolution: Repression, Accommodation, and Opposition in
Post-Internal War States.” Presented at the Midwest Political Science Association conference,
Chicago, Il, April 23-25, 1998. 24 pages.
Kriesberg, Louis. 1998. Constructive Conflicts: From Escalation to Resolution. Lamham, MD.:
Rowman and Littlefield.
Kumar, Krishna, ed. Rebuilding Societies after Civil Wars: Critical Roles for International
Assistance (Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner, 1997).
Leonhardt, Manuela. 2000. “ Towards a Unified Methodology: Reframing PCIA.” in The Impact of
Conflict Prevention Policy: Cases, Measures, Assessments. Michael Lund and Guenola
Rasamoelina, (eds.) Conflict Prevention Network. Baden, Germany: NOMOS.
Lund, Michael S. 2001. “Why Are Some Ethnic Disputes Settled Peacefully, While Others
Become Violent? Comparing Slovakia, Macedonia, and Kosovo,” in Hayward Alker, et. al. Eds.
Journeys through Conflict. Lanham, MD.: Rowman and Littlefield.
Lund, Michael S, and Mehler, et al. 1999. Peacebuilding and Conflict Prevention in Developing
Countries. Conflict Prevention Network, Stiftung and Wissenschaft und Politik.
Lund, Michael S. 1999. “ Preventive Diplomacy' for Macedonia, 1992-1997: Containment
becomes Nation-Building,” and other chapters in Bruce Jentleson, ed. Preventive Diplomacy in
the Post Cold War World: Opportunities Missed, Opportunities Seized and Lessons to Be
Learned. Lanham, MD.: Rowman and Littlefield.
Lund, Michael S. 1998. “Not only When, But How: From Early Warning to Rolling Prevention.” in
Preventing Violent Conflict: Past Record and Future Challenge. Peter Wallensteen, ed. Uppsala,
Sweden: Uppsala University, Department of Peace and Conflict Research.
Lund, Michael S. 1998. “Impacts of Development Aid as Incentives or Disincentives in Reducing
Internal and Inter-state Conflicts: A Review of Findings from Documented Experience.”
Unpublished report to the Development Assistance Committee (DAC), Task Force on Peace,
Conflict And Development, OECD.
Lund, Michael S, Barnett Rubin and Hara, 1998. "Learning from Burundi’s Failed Democratic
Transition, 1993-96: Did International Initiatives Match the Problem?" in Barnett Rubin, ed. Cases
and Strategies of Preventive Action. New York, NT.: Century Foundation Press.

53

Lund, Michael S. 1998. “Developing Case-Based Conflict Prevention and Peacebuilding
Strategies from Recent Experience in Europe,“ in G. Bonvicini, et. al. eds. Preventing Violent
Conflict: Issues from the Baltics and the Caucasus. Baden-Baden, Germany: Nomos.
Lund, Michael S, et al. 1997. Preventing and Mitigating Violent Conflicts: A Guide for
Practitioners. Washington, DC: Creative Associates International, Inc.
Lund, Michael S. 1996. Preventing Violent Conflict. Washington DC: U.S. Institute of Peace.
Miall, Hugh, et al. 1999. Contemporary Conflict Resolution. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.
Miall, Hugh. 1992. The Peacemakers: Peaceful Settlement of Disputes since 1945. New York,
NY.: St. Martin’s Press.
Munuera, Gabriel. 1994. Preventing Armed Conflict in Europe: Lesson from Recent Experience.
Paris, France: Institute for Security Studies.
Paris, Roland, 2001. “Human security: paradigm shift or hot air?” International Security v26, n2 :
87
Paris, Roland. “Constructing Liberal States: IR Theory and Post Conflict Peacebuilding.”
Presented February 25, 1999. 39 pages.
Peceny, Mark, 1999. Democracy at the point of bayonets. University Park, PA. : Pennsylvania
State University Press, 1999.
Quaker United Nations Office, Peacebuilding in War-Time Societies: Workshop Report, (Geneva:
December, 1996).
Ramcharan, B.G. 1991. the International Law and Practice of Early Warning and Preventive
Diplomacy: The Emerging Global Watch. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Marinus Nijhoff.
Regan, Patrick M. 2002. “Third-party interventions and the duration of interstate conflicts.” Journal
of Conflict Resolution Vol.46, No.1: 55.
Reilly, Ben. “Voting is Good, Except When It Guarantees War.” Washington Post, October 17,
1999. Page B2.
Reilly, Ben, Peter Harris, and Michael Lund, et. al. 1998. Democracy and Deep-Rooted Conflict:
Options for Negotiators Stockholm, Sweden: Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance.
Richmond, Oliver P. Maintaining Order, Making Peace (Houndsmill: Palgrave, 2002).
Riskin, Stephen Three Dimensions of Peac building in Bosnia, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Institute
of Peace, 1999)
Rothchild, Donald. 2002. “Third Party Incentives” in Stedman, Stephen John, Donald Rothchild,
and Elizabeth M. Cousens, eds. Ending Civil Wars: The Success and Failure of Negotiated
Settlements in Civil War. Lanham, MD.: Lynne Rienner Publishers
Schwank, Nicolas and Christoph Rohloff. “War is Over- Conflict Continues? Conditions for Stable
Conflict Outcomes.” Presented at the Uppsala Conflict Data Conference, Uppsala, Sweden. June
8-9, 2001. 19 pages.

54

Stedman, Stephen John, Donald Rothchild, and Elizabeth M. Cousens, eds. 2002. Ending Civil
Wars: The Success and Failure of Negotiated Settlements in Civil War. Lanham, MD: Lynne
Rienner Publishers.
Uvin, Peter. Summary Report to the DAC Task Force on Peace and Development, OECD, page
4.
Uvin, Peter , “The Development/Peacebuilding Nexus: A Typology and History of Changing
Paradigms”, Journal of Peacebuilding and Development. Volume 1, Number 1, 2002.
Vayrinen, et. al., 1999. Inventive and Preventive Diplomacy. Notre Dame, Indiana: Joan Kroc
Institute, University of Notre Dame.
Wallensteen, Peter. ed. 1998. Preventing Violent Conflict: Past Record and Future Challenges
(Uppsala, Sweden: Uppsala University, Department of Peace and Conflict Research.
Walter, Barbara F. 1997. “The Critical Barrier to Civil War Settlement.” International
Organization. 51:335-365.
Walter, Barbara F. 1997. Designing Transitions from Violent Civil War. Policy Paper No. 31. San
Diego, Ca: Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, University of California.
Woodward, Susan. 1995. Balkan Tragedy: Chaos and Dissolution after the Cold War
Washington, DC.: Brookings Institution.
Zartman, William, ed. 2001. Preventive Negotiations. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

55

